
4.- Optimistic reason Nº4: Advancements in information processing technologies.

Another reason to be optimistic is technological development. I do think that, given our current state of technology, we can achieve world peace by being Cheerful.

Especially thanks to the addition of AI, which can be used to astonishingly boost our intelligence, so that is just another optimistic factor.

Also, thanks to blockchain networks that allow more trustless, less abusive information management systems. Blockchains is a fancy word to describe a software complex design for  what is actually just a database, where information is stored.

We improved dramatically our information access with ships and planes, telephones. Then the internet was the next gigantic step. Fortunately, we have now faster access thanks to AI and more reliable warehouses thanks to blockchains.

As the capabilities of humans to process information improved, with the invention of the internet and computers for example, the amount of abuse in the world has been reducing, why would it not be the same now with all the new tech? A greater flow of information unlocks a greater flow of thought in the stream of the search for truth. And the truth to be found, regardless of us sometimes wanting to slap each other’s faces, is that we are the same biological bodies, we are not others, we are natural brothers and sisters.

The tale of capitalism and freedom being the core thing that always brings good will still persuade some, because we do have a craving for all the world to become siblings and we have greater potential of intelligence, that current context will camouflage the deeper truth of Cheerfulism and make some people get conformed by the more shallow, yet deep, libertarianism.

Anyway, technological advancement will for the reasons said promote the minimization of abuse. If we mix it with Cheerfulism, then even more.

5.- Optimistic reason Nº5: People can understand the 3-people society principle.

The 3-people society example is simple enough that can be understood by anyone.

This example is the core principle to guide each other through the process of trying to solve a dispute with no abuse, optimally, in medium to long term inside a group. Because it promotes the seek of not needing a policeman, which requires the goal of not abusing.

If people can understand this, they are clearly equipped with the metal capacity to imagine futures where we do not need as much police or futures where we do not abuse that much.

A vital step toward making something a solid reality is being able to imagine it.

The awakening of the retired policeman hope in hard conflicts can only be carried out if people are able to imagine a better future with less abuse. And the fact that people can understand the minimal example that encapsulates this principle is a reason to be optimistic too.

7.- Optimistic reason Nº7: Cheerfulism and terrorism’s existence.

The very same existence of this book is a reason to be optimistic. Furthermore, in a really  paradoxical way, terrorism is a signal of hope to that world peace is reachable.

The existence of terrorism excludes the more sinister but theoretically reasonable option of: because it is the easy thing to do. If someone is intelligent and strong enough, they can, and might, just abuse as much as they can.

As a curious fact, this theoretical is not a given. Lots of us could have stolen so many little things from shops and we have not due to knowing it is not good for the shop owner. We do have in us some instinct of not abusing even when we could, even when the abuse would be minimal and we would have no external retaliation, like stealing a pen. Some of us clearly don’t have it. Some of us do have it. It is all a chance.

Fortunately, we don’t have to chose to belief the rulers of nations will have this attitude, because as of today, this theoretical risk is just that, theoretical.

Cheerfulism is centered around two concepts that complement each other beautifully to promote human peace: happiness and intelligence.

Due to biological reasons, we can not be happy nor survive without others, so due to instinct, we will need others to be happy. By default, we seem to be not dumb enough, sufficiently intelligent, so as to recognize this for small groups of humans, for tribe level organizational structures. But we are clearly not intelligent enough to recognize this, instinctively, at higher level, more complex organizational structures involving other groups, groups made by “others”.

In fact, the existence of States everywhere might just be a display, a proof, that we are too dumb to have this instinct triggered in societies with more population than tribal level complexity. In the very same nations.

When the usability of instincts turns off, power dynamics kick in and massively dominate. As seen in the very beginning of chapter 4, power solves disputes via 2 solutions:

1.- Talk and decide an outcome.
2.- Physically fight and the winner decides an outcome.

A greater intelligence should lean towards people choosing solution one. But maximizing intelligence is not enough, because if someone is intelligent enough, he can figure out a way in which to control the chaos that abuse would produce, thus still choose number two.

Again, observing the modern world, this worry seems just theoretical. Abusive actions have uncontrollable influence as of nowadays. Not even the greatest military of today can assure that their abusive acts will have zero repercussion to its nation. Terrorist attacks, economic punishments, higher amounts of psychological problems, higher internal conflict and tension. All manifestations of the clear evidence that nowadays it is impossible to abuse freely, even for the strongest.

What a weird but real conclusion. The existence of terrorism, shows that too much control over a group still can have painful retaliation to your loved ones. Stepping us away from the concern of someone being too intelligent and strong to abuse us forever.

It is, a bit, like seeing a predator hunt a predator that was trying to hunt us.

So we need to remember we are humans and given enough complexity, we do need the others, and that needing factor, can even make us feel each other as not “the other” anymore. But buddies.

Yes, in theory, a world can exist where the strongest is also very intelligent and manages to abuse with manageable chaos. But just as anarchism, that is just theory. Nowadays reality is other.

I can start to see a trend, it seems a human rule so far for someone to gather a strong power, very centralized, abuse it as much as he can and later the power gets decentralized because of the difficulty in controlling the chaos produced by abuse. Interesting.

I guess this is why big empires fall, they abused, internally and externally too much. Creating more chaos than what they could handle.

Higher level societal structures with abuse potential like 2 nations existing, are more complex, and maybe, due to their complexity, we are just not intelligent enough to always solve the problem via seeing each other as buddies instead of “the other”.

But a maximization of intelligence should reduce that to the minimum, and I think, based on conversations with people of today, that we are more than ever aware that we all eat the same food and shit the same shit. And even if we do not implement it properly as explained earlier. The fact that we can envision it makes me be optimistic in us not being too dumb.

All this combined with the universal desire of happiness that Cheerfulism teaches, maybe also using a universal symbol, like a smile, will “logically” lead us to world peace.

Regardless of anything: 

If someone is strong enough, they can abuse. If they are intelligent enough, they can abuse for longer.

Do not forget that.

And regardless of how much you feel like the other is not the other but your brother, if you are intelligent and strong enough, you can still abuse. This is why I always say minimization and not eradication of abuse. And this is also another reason why worshiping freedom blindly is not the best choice, because the arrogance of thinking yourself as a supreme leader, might make you tackle more chaos than you can actually handle. Just another small critique to libertarianism.

As of today, I think it is pretty clear to the strongest of armies that their abuses have consequences. So that natural step of a strong power abusing until too much chaos is reached is finishing.

Now we have two paths, chaos and the fall of empires, or, seeing each other as buddies, mutually maximize our intelligence, and minimizing the abuse to the minimum. Will that lead to world peace? I’m optimistic, not via 100% logical certainty but out of the world’s observations explained, that yes, we can reach world peace.

Anyway, there is only one way of knowing, and that is trying. Let’s train our minds and reach the happiness goal together.

But if things go wrong. In that moment, the moment where the limits of possibility are reached, in the limits of our intelligence where we can not realize the benefits of cooperation over abuse, in those limits where we start seeing other humans as others instead of buddies. Then, in those limits, hopefully, the aim for happiness, the aim for joy, a universal desire at the core of Cheerfulism, should be able to unite us all, and make us believe and join us in the search of greater intelligence or better technology and more calmed interactions so to avoid wars and uncontrolled abuse.

In that case, will we be able to believe that happiness is possible for all and that will make us think harder and deeper on solving conflicts? Will we be wise enough so to not need the belief and still think harder and deeper to solve the conflicts? Will the strongest and most intelligent of us choose not to abuse out of pure humanity? Out of pure mercy? Out of pure love? Out of pure cheerfulness lead enjoyment?

I can’t fully know, yet I am optimistic, world peace is doable. But only time will tell. Until then, let’s try to be a bit more Cheerful every day.

X.- Conclusion: 6.1.

Recapitulating, we saw that international abuse happens due to three different things: lack of enough intelligence so to distribute resources, lack of survival related physical resources (like water and food) and not getting along with the people of your tribe.

We also saw how two of them, in modern times, are actually solved and controlled to the point of not creating wars. They can be improved though, via more efficient aid to natural disaster victims, better immigration policies or better national security. Anyway, more intelligence won’t harm the improvement of these already decently controlled issues.

Thus, the third one not mentioned yet, the lack of intelligence in efficient and effective resource management, is in modern times, the main issue causing and being caused by international abuse and its ultimate manifestation: wars.

This makes that when nations abuse others, they might be successfully making it look like their economic measurements and lifestyle is improving, and it might be doing so, but at the expense of abusing others and not because they are really intelligently managing resources at a global scale so to satisfy their happiness better.

Higher level nouns can be used to try to understand all these dynamics, like greed, a mix of egoism and laziness. Yet all of them should be explainable by the 6 logical sources of abuse. So, because of that and because Cheerfulism reduces all 6 of them, all abuse related nouns should be solvable too, or minimized, by being Cheerful.

Then, even in the cases where abuse is unavoidable, experience in Cheerfulness won’t be useless.

And because we do have enough food and water, because the pure hate is minimal and influenced by lack of intelligence, the focus on maximization of intelligence and community belonging to the same happiness goal that Cheerfulism brings, all potentiated by technological advancements, should lead us to a state of world peace.

6.2.- The hardest problem transitioning to world peace. The vicious cycle of hate, blame and revenge.

Do you remember the clumsy hunter, Antonio, who hunted too much deer? Well, I will be discussing that very same problem along this section.

Given enough abuse, some people might want to abuse back to balance things out and feel better. This desire ultimately comes from two things:

1.- The hope of intimidation. The hope that the initial abuser realizes that it is not worth it to abuse you again.

2.- The goal of annihilation. This is when you murder or destroy the abuser so he literally never abuses again.

The second one is very risky, because we are social animals, and if we kill a human there is likely someone who cares about that human. Thus they will likely perceive it as if you abused them in an extreme way, and try to seek the abuse-back act, also known as revenge.

The feeling, thus instinct, that fuels the desire of abusing-back, of wanting to revenge, is hate. And the action of labeling someone’s action as abusive it is called, to blame.

As seen all along, the sources of abuse can be carried out at any level and by any entity in our societies. This is always done in different percentages from individuals or groups of individuals, like how much of the abuse comes from the political class and how much comes from the citizens? how much comes from ice cream vendors? how much comes from people with an income larger than X?

In whatever fancy, rigorous or funny way we want to classify and separate us on the act of blame won’t do much. At least nowadays, because today the blame seekers are likely led by hate, an emotion. Then we are just creating sub-systems while fixing a good bunch of variables. Yet we are likely not focusing enough on the nature of the relations within the sub-systems, the abusive actions, key to understanding the problem.

Being blinded by segregation in a hope to seek blame instead of in a hope to understand the problem is fixing too many variables at once. While using emotional labeling we tend to break down and go back and forth redefining the system too infrequently. However this back-and-forth is a key part in what is needed for a better understanding which leads to a better solving. Fixing too much led by emotions, for non-biological tribe level problems, easily leads to uncontrolled chaos.

Revenge is powered by hate, a feeling. And today, most of blame seeking implies the lurking need, or desire, to avenge. A strong enough desire, even if desire it is, can be disguised as need for the individual craving it, the abused one.

This is why putting name and seeking blame in individuals or groups is not the best solution nowadays. At least not in higher levels than a tribe. Because most of the people who blame today are led by emotions and that is not the most dynamic path we can take in the search of solving a problem while thinking like engineers, which is the best way to solve complex problems.

Note that I always say nowadays, there is nothing inefficient with blaming as long as it is not emotion driven. But the people of this modern world are emotion driven. So, in their context, blaming and revenge arise from the feeling of hate, from fixing too many variables and assuming truth, not necessarily from seeking truth.

As a prehistorical analogy, it does not matter if we kill Antonio, let’s say Antonio was the hunter who accidentally or maliciously killed too much deer. That will not stop the act from happening, we must understand the nature of deer reproduction and how the amount of hunting influences it to then teach hunters like Antonio to hunt properly. Only then we will have solved the problem by reducing the likelihood of someone making what Antonio did to the minimum. Without using time constrained coercion that tends to chaos and tension, but with education, conviction and cooperation. It is for sure not enough and likely not even necessary to punish Antonio. Some people will be moved via feelings, those big amounts of variables fixed really quick on their brains, creating an instinctive attempt to solve the problem via punishing him, so he learns, and it can work, but we are already more complex than a deer hunters tribe.

As a little side note. Complex extreme abuses are very similar to natural phenomena. We can not control tsunamis, volcanoes or earthquakes and move them away once they start, and the only thing we can do is to prevent them and minimize the damage once they happen. So same goes with complex and extreme abuses, like wars. Both are of similar features, once they happen they are very hard to combat directly, we can only minimize their impact, and while they do not arise the only thing we can do is to prevent them.

Back to the avenging. Fixing too many variables at once, like when avenging, will tend to chaos due to our solution not properly reflecting the variable complex nature of our modern reality.

What is even worse, the act of revenge creates a hard to stop cycle. Because, in the same way the first abuse created an abuse-back mechanic, the abuse-back mechanic can create, due to it also being an abuse, an abuse-back-back. The revenge of the revenge, the re-revenge. Which is also an abuse, so oh shit, here we go again, and so on and so forth abuse after abuse. A cycle, a loop.

There are 4 ways in which this loop finishes:

1.- The intimidation goal is achieved and a party stops the cycle.

2.- The annihilation goal is achieved and then the party that would abuse-back is no more.

3.- The abuse-back party, stops the cycle, yet not out of intimidation, but out of love and hope on a brighter and more peaceful future.

4.- A superior party with enough strength to the ones involved in the cycle of hate, or cycle of abuse if you prefer, gets into the conflict and intimidates, or annihilates, the parties involved in the cycle of abuse. Taming all chaos thanks to the strength and intelligence it has.

Okay there is a fifth final, but I will omit it as it is not useful, this one is: both parties completely annihilate each other during the abuses. Like with nuclear slaps. As there is no-one left, it makes no sense to keep understanding end. It is pretty clear we should not aim and we should prevent among all things not to break the loop with the fifth final.

So say no more, the best, and hardest, is the 3rd way. But as usual in life, the best paths are often the hardest to start walking by.

Way number one has the downside of that resentment is likely created, which is no other thing than a feeling, the one of the dormant hate inside of a person. Like the lava of a volcano waiting to erupt if conditions are met.

Way number two has the downside of that it does not assure the cycle to stop. As the annihilated party can have, and will likely have, due to being social creatures, friends. And those friends, either will hate the annihilator, blame him and seek revenge or, at least, cultivate resentment, like in way one.

The third way is the best and the one to aim for, yet it is really difficult in cases of extreme abuse, as the amount of instincts and feelings you must tame are gigantic, the amount of variables to unfix are enormous too. In this third scenario, no resentment is created, as the last abuser already abused and felt satisfied and the merciful part is controlling its instincts by definition. Thus it can not trigger the negative consequences of hate nor resentment.

There are more complications, the last abuser will enter in a period of restlessness in the case it does not fully trust the capabilities of the next avenger, or the avenger’s friends, to control their hate or resentment.

Sure, ignoring definitions, someone can fail to control the hate, that is another difficulty on way number three.

None of these difficulties nullify the fact that it is the best solution. As the control of emotions, allows for rational thinking, allows for an engineer’s mind to act, the best at solving complex problems. Way one also achieves this in a way, but a party intimidated likely has resentment, a less stable and further from being the most efficient solution, due to involving emotions, more variables fixed.

The fourth way, if you have noticed, is the State at national levels applying the law. The State using its monopoly of violence to solve disputes.

Even at national level this solution is worse than way number three. Because it requires less effort from the involved parties, likely just to give up, and does not necessarily teach anyone how to control hate nor resentment. It just, very likely, as a tendency, intimidates both parties, punishes some and protects others. Yet in both resides the tendency to suppress emotions instead of the learning on how to control them. In the long run, this does not create less savage individuals but only adds burden to the State as he will have to keep “taming the beasts”.

Leaving resentment and not learning to deal with it is not optimal. As another analogy it is like gas on the floor of a gas station, waiting for an accident to happen, a little spark that makes it all ignite and explode.

Furthermore, this fourth way is more inefficient than the third because it is not possible at international levels. At the worldwide scale, there is no judge, no real law. And there won’t be as long as no one has the monopoly of violence. Today that is impossible because multiple confronted parties have the capability of mutual destruction via nuclear weapons.

If I had to rank them these would be the solutions from best to worst efficiency-wise: 3 (instincts control), 4 (powerful 3rd party intervention), 1 (intimidation), 2 (annihilation).

Therefore, in case of a revenge loop, I would prefer the loop to be addressed with these methods, in that order, starting from 3 and in case it fails continuing to the next option.

I already explained why three is the best. Now, four is better than one because in one the chaos is not fully controlled and the likelihood of resentment ignition is higher due to that. And one is better than two because killing, annihilating, creates way more resentment and hate overall than just intimidating.

In extreme yet simple abuses, like the arbitrary assassination of a loved one, all explained is logical, and even something more, it is emotional, anyone can understand what I wrote only using feelings, not really needing a logical explanation like what I’m doing.

But as abuse starts stemming from more and more complex scenarios, like nowadays wars, the ability to discern between what solution to proceed with fades. Because the proper analysis of the real strengths and intellects of the involved parties are conformed by too many variables. The amount of complexity of the conflict is too much due to the amount of people and stories involved. Leading to a way higher difficulty in deciding the optimal solution to try, and in executing it properly.

Precisely because of that lots of people are experts in what we call geopolitics. And still, these experts can only have an approximate understanding of the problem, orders of magnitude better than one from a random person though. These experts can propose better solutions, but never perfect. Because they are not omniscient and do not know in detail every story and every feeling and thought of all involved parties in real time.

The only way to achieve perfect understanding is a collective and decentralized one. One where each and every single one of the parties masters step three.

Sure, we can even mix it with the guide of experts and all, but life now is so complex, we have so many things to do and decide, that learning at expert levels on every complex conflict is not realistic, literally because our brains just can not process rationally all modern life’s complex problems’ information. So ultimately, if we aim for perfect understanding so to later have better solutions, we must cultivate the ability of handling their part in each affected party, and not to tend to delegate lots of variables to single or relatively small groups of humans.

Thus, the best solution has to pass through a personal mastery of way three, to train everyone to understand and tame as much as possible their instincts so to be able to carry out way 3. This, mixed with experts in these conflicts, slowly but surely, can solve them without cycles of abuse that affect generations.

Because number three targets the dynamic existence of the conflict, from each abused party. It allows for more fine grained control on proper information handling between affected parties.

Again, it can get really complex, like in wars, there are lots of people affected. And not only it is complex due to the amount of variables involved, but also because the action of controlling revenge, in extreme scenarios, is also extremely hard. Even given maximum intelligence and optimization for happiness.

Rationality is disabled if you are in extreme pain or danger, so it is out of Cheerfulism’s scope, because it is a state and a feeling of pure survival, and Cheerfulism works after survival is granted. Still, even if success for instinctual control on these scenarios is unlikely, being Cheerful won’t hurt. At least it will help in smaller conflicts, like when someone slaps you.

Once international extreme abuse is started it just can create a really hard to stop cycle of chaos, not impossible, but really hard. Just like a volcano, our most realistic option is prevention. As of today, the only thing I can think of is, in cases of this extreme abuse, good luck, I just don't know how to solve this in an assured way, it really seems like it is impossible to 100% assure peace and finishing wars is a matter of who can suffer for longer.

What I know is that those who after extreme abuses like the ones mentioned, choose the third way to end the hate cycle, they are heroes worth being remembered and included in the tales of history.

Fortunately, it is a minority of the world that happens to live in these extreme total war scenarios. So we can still help them by becoming Cheerful friends, even if they, for now, likely can not become Cheerful due to the extreme circumstances, we can become Cheerful and help them during the present times and future.

So when their trauma will have healed or be minimized, they can too transition to maximizing their intelligence to optimize their happiness. We can create Cheerful nations, which in these instances behave just like a friend who spends time with you and tries to make you feel better in the extreme case of a loved one dying. This attitude and behavior is the only one I think it can realistically help in these extreme cases.

Even if hard, even if defying instincts, we must promote and aim for the third outcome. Via an honest understanding, as much as possible, of the core factors that lead to this chaos. And us, the ones under not such extreme abuses, we must aid our human buddies who are in wars with our lesser, more controllable chaos, where we are able to use rationality and intelligent mediation, with the hope that it can help the ones who can not use it to stop their chaos. Avoiding strength usage, but sure, using it if unavoidable.

This is by far the hardest problem we have to overcome. But still, we must maximize our intelligence, optimize our happiness and use all our increased capabilities to go after that. To help solve it fixing the less variables possible.

Humans have autonomy but they also get greatly influenced by their peers. A predominant Cheerful world will aid, thanks to this human nature, to promote the end of wars.

Furthermore, the cycle of hate is a chaos creating action, which Cheerful individuals naturally reject as it does not help when using their intelligence to order the chaos and optimize for happiness. The more chaos the more variables, fixed or not, to handle at the same time.

Someone driven by the true search of solutions deeply hates that, deeply avoids it, it only makes the problem more difficult. And hopefully, Cheerful habits build on us that natural rejection to seek revenge. Yet don’t be a fool, if the abuse is too big, even someone Cheerful will punch you, or whatever action he decides.

In fact, as he has maximized his intelligence, you should be careful in messing around with Cheerful people, they can craft more deeper and complex revenges. Avoiding revenge does not quit the natural option of choosing to apply discipline towards the lack of respect. Of choosing other solution but the ideal option three.

As a simple example of an effective non-three solution, when this is done intelligently enough with a short timed, small and impactful revenge, it can lead to harmony instead of chaos. Like when someone slaps you but you slap him back so hard he regrets. Note this is way one, intimidation. Sure, he might not regret, he might attack back and now we got bigger chaos. Sure, he might not attack back now but get resentment and later in the future attack you. And sure, as said, the problem can also just end there with your big slap back.

Life is always likelihood, as you might have already noticed so far, being Cheerful does not guarantee success, but it is the best thing we can do.

Not only allows better problem solving by strengthening you, but it also prevents problems.

6.2.1.- An idea to promote the third way of ending cycles of hate: Temporary clearly pretended ignorance.

Hatred leads to chaos, and in chaos, prosperity is hindered. However, violence is sometimes inevitable by nature, and punishment of the clearly abusive faction will occur if the abused so wills and can.

Temporary active ignorance is defined as the public recognition and denouncement of crimes, but without applying punishment, not through amnesty, but just to avoid chaos.

The crime is acknowledged, understood, and despised, though left unpunished, with the hope or the plan that reducing chaos may promote a better solution, so that the crime is not repeated in the future.

It is not mercy, nor forgiveness, it is ignorance. Ignoring the abuser, as if the bad happened but there was no-one to blame. Pretending, just pretending, as if an unexpected tornado blew your home. You feel bad but you ignore the punishing act because you can not punish nature. That type of ignoring is what is carried out, but this time not because the crime is considered a natural phenomenon, but because it is considered that punishing it will lead to more chaos than actively ignoring it. And you do not really ignore it, you just pretend to ignore it. And it does not matter if the other part knows it is fake, in fact it is better if they know that your ignorance is faked.

Then, along with it, it must be clearly told to the abuser that this will be a one time action and that the reason for that is to aim for a better future. But, if abuse happens again, immediate and total revenge will happen, maybe even to the annihilation point. This is why it is temporary.

The temporary part also refers to the hope that, if given enough time, future generations of humans who were not there when the abuse happened appear. Then, with their maximized intelligence and united by the goal of happiness, they are explained the past of their parents and neighbors, yet, as they were not directly abused, they have a greater likelihood to choose to stop the cycle. To tame the instinct.

This solution is a mix between others named in the previous section. First number three (instincts-control) and then solution number one (intimidation) with a little glimpse of solution four (annihilation).

Because it does not involve a State, this solution can also be applied internationally.

It is a great mix because it does not only show the abuser that you can hold yourself and thus he can trust a bit more that you won’t abuse back if he does as demanded, but it also promotes and acknowledges all the other realities of hate, resentment and potential revenge.

I think it is the most doable scenario. Yet all of its parts must be clearly present. It must be all: temporary, pretended and ignorance.

It is essential to understand that this action, if you are not a real threat to the abuser, is harmless. Power, in the face of ignorance, continues to act as it pleases. It is only through being a real opponent or annoyance that temporary clearly pretended ignorance gains strength and can truly be effective.

In small and/or simpler conflicts, this should be enough. But in bigger and more complex conflicts, this attitude does minimize but does not eliminate the risk faced by former abusers in the new reality.

In complex and extreme problems, involving big amounts of humans, there is always a small statistical chance that someone does feel hate, resentment, and does seek revenge.

The case of wars is pretty clear, even if 99 out of 100 participants in a war agree on peace and stop, and they actually do. That one single person, due to coming from extreme abuse, might try very hard to achieve revenge on someone else, let’s say the leader of the other faction. It could be towards anyone though, not just the leader.

Because of the sheer size of people in these types of conflicts and the extreme actions they suffered, there is always a chance of someone not choosing to apply the temporary clearly pretended ignorance and choosing to dedicate his life to avenging, which, in the worst case, means to kill someone else from the other team.

This is a clear example of what is called taking justice into your own hands.

Therefore, exile to far lands or physical protection of the most known abusers is recommended as a way to mitigate this unlikely but real risk in great conflicts.

Anyway, again, abuse can never be eliminated forever, it can only be minimized forever.

In smaller conflicts, temporary clearly pretended ignorance is the way to go and it likely leads to a nice ending with no more abuse.

But in more complex and extreme conflicts, like wars, even though it is still the best option, it is not an assurance for everyone’s safety.

Intelligent protection and control of the ones who might still seek revenge or the ones who might receive it is vital, for that, maximization of intelligence is also needed. As you can see Cheerfulism’s principles never get in the way, sometimes they might not be enough, but they are never completely ineffective.

And a great capacity for new generations to understand and be intelligent enough to tame potential instincts is also vital. This is also another reason why the next chapter focuses on creating a really efficient and effective base for educational systems.

X.- Conclusion: Chapter 6.

As seen in section 4.1.3.1  of a previous chapter, rationality can be understood as fixing little variables when solving a problem. And then when the problem is too big or imminent, like war related ones, it is very hard or impossible to make humans fix little variables when solving them, it is way easier to make them attempt to solve the problem by fixing lots of variables at the same time (emotions).

I think it is that way because we are biologically wired that way. Probably because in the simpler past these kinds of reactions saved us from fast lions, quick tigers or running from rapid fires in the forest we were inhabiting.

But now, politically and economically, these fast reactions are acting against us, they are making us abuse each other in more nuanced, way more complex, less quickness needed, problems.

Modern time problems likely arise from this ancient wiring of our brain, tending to fix too many variables at once, which was useful in simple times, but not anymore. We have to, sort of, fight against our instincts if we want to keep thriving.

Likely, due to natural adaptation and selection, the ones who do will thrive and in hundreds of years, future humans will look at us and not even understand why we naturally tended to abuse in this era. Or, who knows, maybe genetic engineering makes us reach this faster. For now our only solution relies on self-control and awareness, on having principles to guide us through, Cheerfulism’s ones, for example.

I hope too that understanding the core issues as a natural biological consequence helps to seek less revenge by realizing it is really a general biological problem enhanced by our current technological and social context. And not a person specific, nation specific, one.

Summing up, our lack of intelligent resource management leads to our nation’s decline, and if we are stronger than the neighbors, it leads to first our neighbors’ decline due to our abuse, and second, after we have finished sucking them up like a parasite, our decline. And eventual extinction.

We must get to know ourselves, know what makes us happy, we must be as intelligent as we biologically can and then by natural instinct from the intelligent dialogue about all this with our neighbors, using always peace based on the understanding that we all are humans, and creating less chaos and thus an easier environment to thrive in.

If we all start doing this, slowly but surely, or maybe even quickly, we will minimize abuse at personal, hood, national and international level.

Let's see what the minimal abuse looks like when we all are truly seeking happiness and being as intelligent as we can. Who knows, there might even be no wars anymore. I would bet on that, because we have crazy good improving every day technology that can improve us too, that can help us tame our over-used instincts. We also have lots of resources, it truly feels like we just need to organize them better, starting at a personal and people close to us level.

Good luck to all, especially people in or close to wars, I know it might be impossible, but do not forget the knowledge, it is what tames our chaos.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
