
Therefore if we want to create a democratic protocol we must have a separation of powers that control each other with equal force, so there is no unmatched power that can change the rules whenever it fancies. That equal force that controls and that is given to each separated natural power can be, for example, the required support of the people of a nation. So now we would have a system that not only puts the forces pointing in different directions, but one that, if for any reason any force deviates and clashes against another, they will self-nullify or self-destroy due to having the same amount of force.

Note that, a democracy without these limits would be weak and unstable, as per mentioned, if the group managing the State wishes, could just transition to another power dynamics protocol.

Please refrain from labeling this potential dynamic arising from the incomplete definition a good or evil mechanic. As you might have noticed I have not used them nor the word abuse, which by its previous definition implies some good and some evil. That will depend on who you ask, likely the group with the power would consider this action good, others that might not agree with all its decisions will consider it evil. Just remember, at the end of the day, we can achieve deeper, more useful truths without using these labels.

Therefore now we can see, that by the very nature of the State, due to its unmatched power, we have to separate it and give each of the separations equal force if we want for our power dynamics protocol to be a democratic one that lasts.

Personally, another intuitive understanding for completing the definition of democracy is: a power dynamics protocol that results in the most delta neutral partition of the powers within the State, ideally this one being zero.

For those of you who do not know what delta neutral means. In math delta is usually used as another word for difference, it is usually written with the Greek letter delta (this one →  Δ). It just means taking the difference of 2 things, so delta neutral means that the difference is neutral, nothing, zero. This means that if we take the amount of power given to each partition of the power of a State, and we subtract them with one another, the result will be 0. Therefore, balanced.

The less neutral is the delta, the greater is the chance that, by random events of nature and society or by calculated events from groups in a society, oligarchic or dictatorial power dynamics can be set.

Just by pure force mechanics and statistical reasoning, by the pure changing will of the power holders, we need to complete the definition of a democracy with the separation of powers and the complete independence from one another.

Some will argue, and I think they are statistically right, that we need the separation and independence of powers in a democracy in order to minimize the potential yet assured abuse from the State to the people when their interests are not the same.

The argumentation goes as follows: Any uncontrolled power, given long enough time or just by existing, ends up in abusive tendencies. I consider this an interesting and very strong argumentation, because in all human history so far, this seems to be the tendency. However, in theory, a total power can chose not to abuse. Therefore I’m not a strong supporter, even though I support it and consider it a functional reasoning process, of constructing a definition and understanding of democracy from this ethical point of view. I consider it ethical because if you are considering abuse as a factor, you are implying a good and an evil. Someone harming other (evil) in the benefit of oneself (a good).

The argumentation considers that it is natural, and easier, for a living being to just abuse as long as it is not faced by an equal, or threatening enough, force. In similar words, as seen, a being can abuse as long as it can control the chaos arising from its abuse.

Again, all are likelihoods, there is a chance that an unmatched power remains non-abusive for a long time. Yet that is not the tendency as per human history so far, thus we should not act every day as if it was, because then, per sheer statistics of nature, we would be wrong most of the time. This is mainly why I support this flow of thoughts even if I do not consider it the pure foundation that should be used to define democracy.

Personally I think this tendency stems from the complexity of our societies, as per the amount of individuals, and the subjective nature of happiness. We have so many people and so many desires that makes us happy that to coordinate them all using non-conflicting forces is impossible for our current degree of intelligence. Therefore, abstracting our thoughts from this to reach deeper truths is very hard.

On top of that, though at more fundamental levels which I do agree as fundamental, the argumentation follows with that creating chaos, disorder, is literally more physically easy, it requires less effort. I agree until here. The, the argumentation says that as long as a living being can still live in the chaos, it will do so, by inertia. Unless faced with another force bearer being, a competitor, that makes the first being not able to successfully exists with the chaos to satisfy its needs. The way I disagree with this is that I consider it incomplete, I do think living beings might just not stay in the chaos by inertia. What distinguishes living beings from inert ones is that we “machines” with ordering capabilities.

Even with this debate apart, what I will explain still holds. So, then, because of these natural tendencies, even if somehow we start with democratic traits of power access and management as the ones defined on the previous incomplete definition, if a society just incorporates them to its power dynamics and nothing more, the power will tend to be every time reduced in smaller and smaller amounts of groups with greater and greater amounts of power. Because whichever group controls the State, which is an absolute power, if it controls all its parts, at some point, it will fall into the natural tendency of making it easier for them to follow its own interest and goals.

And, making it easier for them means that it will eventually require altering the power dynamics protocol so it is easier for the groups controlling the State to keep it, resulting in the application of similar dynamics described in the oligarcracy or even in the dictatorship incomplete definitions.

So we have seen that to actually define and therefore create a democracy we must take into account the actions and reactions mechanics and constrain then in such a way that they do not break other parts of the definition.

You can reach this conclusion, as seen, via just thinking about pure power and forces or via thinking about ethical interests and forces.

Completing the definitions: Dictatorship.

Now let’s go to dictatorship. How does it handle the potential reactions and how should we define this management in order to keep the definition consistent?

At a State level, dictatorships, by an ideal definition do not have this problem. As they do not allow any competitor and they have the all mighty power of the State.

However if we step away from the definition and ideas realm, in reality they likely have competitors that have to be silenced.

As, as seen with the limited variables that can be handled per human, similar to the critique to communism, a reduced group of people can not accurately rule and govern with the same interests as every single human on a big society they rule for, or rule over.

Thus we encounter a clash and potential for abuse. Now, if the protocol for power dynamics must be a dictatorship, then we can include in its realistic and complete definition the use of methods to neutralize any potentially strong enough opposing power. These methods can be imprisonment, censorship, public executions, silent murdering, the modern social media defamation campaign, economical bribery to corrupt initially real opposition... among others.

The ruling group (elite) will tend to chose the silencing act who creates the more manageable chaos according to the intelligence of the ruling group compared to the abused and repressed group. The more intelligent and strong they are compared to the abused being, usually the people, the more severe and chaos tending the abuses they can make, like public executions. Elites, by mere definition, are way smaller in number compared to the people, so in practice the abuse amount and methods’ severity are proportional to the difference in intelligences of the elite with the people. The greater the difference in intelligences, the more severe the abuses.

Completing the definitions: Oligarcracy.

Let’s now complete the definition of oligarcracy.

oligarcracies, ideally, do not really mind about reactions either. As the groups that form them are the only ones who allow or not the creation of other groups. They, by definition, can’t just abuse in any way desired as dictators do, yet they just have to follow some rules based on a consensus agreed with their elite peers. And, if any other group tries to emerge, they will directly or indirectly force him to follow those rules and fall in the elite’s consensus.

As you might have noticed, for the very same reasons, the completion of the definition is the same as in the dictatorship. Due to the impossibility of making the whole society have the same interests as the ruling elites, they will have to neutralize the ones who differ. Usually, due to existing multiple groups that require consensus, the neutralization process is less direct, or more sophisticated than in dictatorships. Because the groups have to agree, reach a consensus, the methods for reactions’ neutralizations must be more complex as they must align with the intelligences and power of each distinct group in the elite.

A way in which oligarchies neutralize opposing and revolutionary groups is to assure that if they emerge, then they try to corrupt them via economics and making them become non-revolutionary groups by linking their economic funding to public funds, a.k.a. tax payer money collected and controlled by the all-mighty power of the State.

Then, leveraging that any human organization at large scales functions as an oligarchy, as Robert Michels observed last century, they jut need to bribe the leader or the little most influential people inside the new revolutionary movement and hope for them to be able to fool their followers into submission. It work pretty well. But, if for any reason the follower are not fooled, well then it does not work and other methods will have to be used.

The money they used does not really need to just be tax payer money, it can also be money mainly controlled and/or greatly influence by the already existing groups that can aspire to control the State, the elites. This is what I meant by interconnected internal management structures at the initial definitions. In this case, I’m explaining an example of economical interconnected structure.

And, as the last nuance, they do not really need to bribe the key revolutionaries with money, they can also threat with violence at the mafia style, social defamation, or any other silencing technique already mentioned in the dictatorship part.

This way, leaders of opposing groups that act by reaction can be bought and slowly the leaders themselves silence or trick their followers into eventually making less or even no opposing force.

Completing the definitions: Finale.

And finally let’s complete the definitions of oligarcracies and dictatorships stating that in them, there can not be a complete separation of powers. In dictatorships none at all, and in Oligarcracies there might be some, but not complete.

This is because the powers of the State can not be fully or even slightly separated. Because if so the degree of freedom that that separation of power brings can lead to emerging groups that can not be controlled by the existing one/s.

Thus democracy is not only defined by the people’s capability to create groups with a high degree of freedom, but also from the fact that it tries, by definition and its assured survival, to reduce to a minimal any abuse of power.

Because in a system where people can freely create groups, but once one group is elected has all power, it is just really energetically easy to eventually centralize group creation mechanics and lead to an oligarcracy or tyranny (dictatorship) as we saw.

This is actually one of the core reasons why some nations allow gun ownership to their citizens, so to counterbalance this natural risk of powerful entities, like a State, to slowly centralize in faulty systems and start being abusive without control. There are other methods not involving guns, like educating people and designing your institutions accurately, we will talk about them later. As someone born in a non-guns country, I found the argumentation interesting, I will leave it here for all those who have been born in places like mine.

Anyway, more curious thoughts apart, here I leave the final definitions:

- Dictatorship: when there is one leader with a bunch of allies, all of them under the same group, always managing the State. No other group is allowed to aspire to manage the State (the monopoly on the use of violence).

- Oligarcracy: when there is more than one group, each with their respective leaders and interconnected internal management structures. The groups alternate between each other, every now and then, sometimes even the people vote it in elections, on which one of them manages the State. For any other emergent group that might aspire to manage the State they need to be first approved by groups already capable of managing the State and to follow similar internal management structures to the ones the existing groups hold.

- Democracy: it is like an oligarcracy but there is no need for the existing groups’ approval to create new groups. Nor to follow similar internal management structures. The only requisite to create a new group is that any group, 2 citizens or more, just because they are citizens, can create a group to aspire to manage the State. Each group internally managed as they want as long as the management only depends on the effort of the members of that group.

- Anarchism: There are groups, but there is no State. There is no monopoly on violence, nor violence, ideally. The groups organize with each other without the use and the fear of external violence.

Note that I did not bother yet in completing or making more nuanced my understanding of anarchism. This is a practical choice, my time and brain power is limited and I prefer to focus on other protocols that actually exist today and so far make doable sense to my thinking process. As I grow and I learn and think more details about everything, including anarchism, I will keep refining the book with them as I always do.

For example, I’m currently reading Robert Michels’ study on the oligarchic tendencies of democratic groups. To be honest, I think, for now, due to cognitive limits, even democratic systems eventually land in the alternation in power of 2 or little more main parties (groups). Maybe this is linked to the good and evil, yes or no, mindset we currently use. Maybe, if we adopt the 2 dimensional approach, in democratic nations, there will be 4 main parties.

Anyway, this does not affect democracy, as it does not mean that there will be lot of option to chose from, it just means that, if there is a need for a new option or to replace an existing one, it can be done with ease by the people.

8.2.2.- Why democracy, for now.

Now that we know the definitions under I which construct this book. Let me explain why I think we should aim for democracy.

8.2.2.1.- Why not-s.

Why not dictatorships?

I will start explaining it by tackling why I do not prefer dictatorships.

They are worse as they lack dynamism thus it is less adaptive, which makes satisfying human needs harder in ever changing environments, specially in ones who do it quickly.

Furthermore, dictatorships tend to be very centralized by nature, thus there is a high chance they are handled too many variables to manage. Just as in my critique to communism in the economics part. This lack of enough intelligence to handle so many variables likely leads to inefficient actions, as abusive behavior, which is not good for the majority by definition, as the dictating group is a minority. Yeah, zero abuse is always impossible, yet we must minimize the chances of it, not increase them.

I do not mean dictatorships can not work. Dictators can still make good decisions. And if they do it consistently, they will likely face no power tackling back against them.

As I always say it depends on the analytical context. Yet, in bigger contexts, those of long-term tendency terms, dictatorships are more static and more centralized, precisely the traits that obstruct intelligent individuals to flow freely and solve problems while and for adapting to future challenges.

Hence, the chances of a dictatorship adapting are lower, they are not the rule, they are in tendencies terms, the exception. And we should not aim to behave like we live in a continuous exception, because then we will be statistically wrong most of the time.

Why not oligarcracies?

The critique to oligarcracy is basically the same. Yet, as oligarcracies have a greater number of groups with a slightly greater variety, it has a more dynamic nature and it is less centralized.

Because of this, it will statistically function better than a dictatorship. Still, it is not as decentralized and as dynamic as a democracy.

However, as oligarcracies are a more sophisticated and complex system, you can craft more complex and sophisticated arguments on why they should exists. We will explore them now. Like the ideas behind plutocracies and technocracies.

But, all of them can not escape the truth of its more static and centralized nature, qualities that, as explained all along and repeating myself, obstruct intelligent individuals to flow freely and solve problems while and for adapting to future challenges.

They will, for some time, escape that truth yet they can not escape it forever. This deeper static and centralized nature, by the natural forces of human existence, will at some point stop being enough, and both dictatorships and oligarcracies will have to be, as software engineers say, deprecated.

Even though human nature is hierarchical and an authority is needed, as human societies change with its natural cycle: people are born, die and teach each other along the way. As that process executes, if humans do not get extinguished and we find ways of successfully storing the information taught, which we seem to be good at, the complexity of our societies will grow.

We can not escape forever the ever growing complexity of wisdom, which eventually requires decentralization and dynamism to arrange.

This is the fundamental argument that make these protocols eventually not functional. Which is, in practice, a gamble which its odds get worse the more time it passes. As you can not measure, you can not predict, if you can not predict, your ability to solve problems and adapt decreases over time.

This fundamental cycle of our existence brings the end of centralized and static protocols, slowly testing them out, creating friction, with each new generation of humans. New beings, with slightly or completely different characteristics and birth-environments will be born which will lead to lots of completely or slightly different desires that will need to be arranged all over again.

The complexity of the task does not end there. These new beings, because of another human trait, the one of teaching the new generations old lessons, will likely inherit greater, more complex wisdom, for example, technological progress related knowledge. A higher starting point of complexity in their intellectual journey, which, will unavoidably create friction with the simpler social structures and norms created for the lower complexity starting points of the previous generations.

The friction will and must be resolved, and societies with power dynamics protocols that are more centralized and static, will create more pressure and explosions, in the shape of societal violence, stress, visible or silent misery generally speaking, when exposed to this unavoidable friction.

Newer technologies, more complex wisdom reflected in a deeper understanding of the universe, which usually allows for more of us to exist taking usage of our natural resources, which makes no other thing but to make the system even more complex, putting even more burden on top of these simpler more centralized and static systems.

Overall, as long as we keep fucking, preserving and teaching knowledge, our societies will do no other thing but to increase in complexity. And there will be a point where these more centralized and static protocols will just not be enough.

Therefore, if we want to last in time, we must transition to democracy, and in a very far away future, if we figure it out, to anarchism-look-alike protocols.

If we do not do it, then conflicts, also by the very same nature of humans, will arise. And these conflicts, technical or social, in the same way that society is now more complex, they will be more complex to solve too. Whenever that happens, there is chance, which ultimately will be a reality, that the old ologarcracies and dictatorships won’t be able to solve them.

Due to too much variable, I’m unable to predict if we are already close to that point in time. That point in time will come, however, I just do not know when. What I know is that the amount of wars in the last decades keeps being relatively the same and in the same old geographical areas. This might be signaling the limits of minimizing abuse given our current political and economical solutions.

New revolutionary technologies are being developed: CDNs, AI, and zero-knowledge cryptography which will allow for the creation of more efficient solutions. Wether centralized and static ones or dynamic and decentralized ones. I bet that, due to the increase flow of information and new trust dynamics these technologies create, they will be the key to actually make all nations step towards the next decentralization step.

The next step, without more war and extreme conflict, look like:

- Most oligarcracies will become democracies.

- Actual democracies will refine their checks-and-balances that keep the system going.

- Hard dictatorships, those that nowadays there are not even elections and are isolated from the world will transition to oligarchracies for a generation.

- Soft dictatorships will transition to a small period of half a human generation of oligarcracies. With soft dictatorships I refer to these countries which nowadays refer to themselves as democracies just because their population can vote but the same figure or party stays in power for decades and because all new candidates suddenly die, disappear or are bribed into retiring.

I predict this timeline because, thanks to the new technologies, we can learn faster and communicate better the way forward. Taking less time that the previous decentralization steps took.

However, if we do not follow this path, who knows, maybe one of the conflicts is the so famous and always around the corner World War III that extinguishes our species. That, if anything, will signal the dumbness of our species, we, human beings, with whatever biological mechanisms we had, were not able to go further.

Concluding with the argumentation against more centralized and static systems: Even though more centralized and static protocols might be the temporary solution that works now and worked in the past, sooner or later, they will stop working. As the inherited wisdom makes complexity grow. This is the ever growing complexity of wisdom curse, or blessing, humans face.

In any way, and in favor of Cheerfulism, as we have seen previously, the maximization of intelligence with a focus on happiness optimization creates several dynamics already explained in section 5.4.2 so to be optimistic regarding the the minimization of abuse, which leads to less conflict, less chaos, more predictability. Makings survival and happiness easier to execute even if we remain in dictatorships or oligarcracies.

Why not democracies?  On the gun-to-monkey weakness.

Don’t be a fool either, even if I have democratic tendencies, I acknowledge its imperfections. Don’t forget point 2 from the essential traits that protocols which work best follow:

2.- Maximization of the intelligence of the individual with action potential. Increasing its dynamism.

Decentralization and dynamism are really cool and work marvelously, yet only if given to intelligent individuals. One because only intelligent individuals can process as much variables, and second, which derives from one, because the creation and maintenance of such systems is a highly complex task on itself, requiring for its successful completion the achievement of such degree of intelligence.

A short Youtube video I love, where a guy named Osho (also known as Rajneesh), an Indian philosopher as per what the AI told me, once said:

“Democracy basically means government by the people, of the people, for the people... but the people are retarded.”

Here is a Youtube link in case you are reading this in an era where Youtube exists: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QFgcqB8-AxE.

This emblematic quote summarizes really well the main “danger” of democracy, but, deep down, it actually summarizes the danger I’ve named right above of decentralizing and making more dynamic systems with less intelligent and dumber people.

As mentioned, these logically better systems are more complex, going no further than democracy, designing a properly functioning democratic constitution is a far more complex task than the one, if it even exits, of a dictatorship. Dictatorships do not have to deeply bother with game theory, incentives design, checks and balances, unambiguous wording etc They jut have to bother about effective organization of the State and silencing potential uprising revolts. But, as it has all the power of the State, the second to-do is not that hard. Anyway, the task of organizing a State in itself is a difficult one that a body which is centralized and static will eventually mess up as we have previously analyzed.

The danger of democracy can also be simply understood with this other popular phrase: This is like giving a gun to a monkey.

Plutocracy or technocracy, mentioned earlier, which are jut a type of oligarcracy, based their whole existence on this premise. In case you do not know, plutocracy defends the right of the wealthiest groups to control power. And technocracy defends the right of the technocrats elite to control power. Technocrats are those who know how technology works and make it progress. Curiously enough, in a system that rewards efficiency above most of things, technocrats usually end up being among the richest and both types of olgarcraciess mix, leading to a sort of plutotecnocracy.

Libertarianism, as you might have noticed, has the same “gun-to-monkey” weakness. But in the realm of economics.

As I said with socialism in resource management: Oligarcracies, or even dictatorships might be needed, but we should not be proud of them, one because they signal the untamed presence of abusive traits which promote chaos, and second because that chaos, arising from abuse and from the ever growing complexity of human wisdom, leads to limits and friction in our thriving capabilities as a species. For these two fundamental reasons we should aim and strive for systems as much decentralized and dynamic as possible, such as democracy and libertarianism, both understood under the definitions of this book, remember. 

As a currently controversial take, nations that fall under dictatorial or oligarchic regimes do so, in part, because of their and their neighbors’ lack of greater intelligence. Wether of politicians or citizens’ intelligence. Same applies for nations who opt for economical socialism or the lack of anarchism. These protocols are just a sign of not intelligent enough individuals, or at least, not intelligent enough yet. And here is where hope resides.

I do not think this lack of intelligence is mainly lead by dumbness or psychopaths, but mainly by improvable traits such as ignorance and laziness.

Wether economically or politically, I prefer protocols who better follow both of the 2 points mentioned. Because they better allow people to be the best version of themselves. They allow people to better leverage the natural biological mechanisms that have kept them alive and thriving for thousands of years in a more efficient, adaptive way.

And, if you allow me to intertwine sections, the only way to make dictatorships or oligarcracies sustainable would be by limiting human intelligence via limiting its natural exploration instinct. This seems impossible, every time you go against nature, at some point it explodes in your face in some way.

For example, drinking alcohol to keep you awake for the party and then the next day you can’t do much. For example, drinking coffee to work longer for a few days, you will end up with poor resting ability and higher levels of anxiety. For example, fighting a lion, you lose, and die.

Another way to delay the deadline of the unavoidable change, not to stop it, would be to keeping the population amount the same, or even reducing it. However, as long as knowledge is inherited, stored, and we do now self annihilate in a nuclear war, this will just be a slow down, as the natural human instinct of exploration will lead to the unavoidable ever growing complexity of wisdom.

Trying to sustain centralized and static power dynamics follows the same natural principle of something exploding in your face at some point. It is just that, due to the complexity of the situation, you need a certain combination of factors to align, which does not always happen, in order for the thing to explode in your face. But at some point, it will, by the natural forces already mentioned. And when that happens, the consequences can be as the ones described: from a hangover, to death, and extinction.

Even if we unrealistically assume that you manage to fully control the instinct to explore that all humans awaken and to keep population sizes equal, then your society will likely last less than if it was a more decentralized and dynamic one, because you will simply have a greater likelihood for this perfect storm of factors against you to appear.

8.2.2.2.- Why yes-es. More guns and more monkeys.

Often, lasting change comes from conviction and undeniable arguments in favor rather than reaction and arguments against “the alternative”. So let’s understand the conviction side of the matter.

Why oligarcracies or even dictatorships?

As said earlier, with oligarchies we can logically craft a complex scenario where a technocrat, because he is very intelligent, has control over some people and takes better decisions than the people he is controlling would take democratically.

We can say that it is safe to assume a technocrat as a very intelligent being due to having the capability of handling and developing technology, tools that solve problems, very complex ones usually.

In a very Cheerful way, a technocrat can say, as of X society, if we measure everyone’s intelligence we can actually see that we would operate better, in short or long term, if I rule. And he might be right.

Unfortunately, we can not measure this due to how complex and dynamic our society is and due to our limited measuring technologies. But the scenario showcased above is not illogical and it is plausible.

Dictatorships can also be argued in favor of via using a similar logic. For example, it can go as follows:

Some dictatorships might come from a period of a long civil war, under which a victorious side became a dictatorial regime. In this case, it can even be logically argued as this being good, in the sense of the lesser evil. Because under the fuzziness and chaos of a long lasting civil war, it can be deemed impossible to clearly convince everyone of who is the “bad one who deserves to lose”, therefore, before the impossibility of a rational end amidst chaos, the end of the chaos and beginning of any order is better than none.

And after the finalization of the war, it could be stated that the society was too fragmented internally to even function, and a firm tight grip is actually giving better results. And they might even be right in their claim, yet again, due to the complexity of modern human societies and the chaos of societies in conflict, we can not empirically confirm it by measuring with certainty all variables involved.

Our best approximation would be a historical analysis, which, obviously, is pure speculation based on texts which who know who actually wrote them and under which intentions and conditions. That is just not accurate enough for a convincing resolution that must coordinate all of people as in our current world.

From this we can see that the arguments in favor of less decentralized and dynamic protocols are based on logically correct but empirically impossible to verify claims.

Don’t be a fool either, arguments in favor of decentralized and dynamic protocols are the same. Yet, as I think they are the solution, I’m to lazy to focus on crafting them, but you can figure them out easily with similar reasons to the long ago mentioned one of someone who becomes drug addict when given freedom analysis. Something on the lines of:

How do you know, with empirical certainty, that, given freedom to someone, it will not use it to purposefully abuse others generating too much chaos or it will not just fall into some addiction?

Therefore they are, in practice, founded over a what-if belief applied on a single time-frame of a society. This analytical framework falls into the realm of what is usually known as social-sciences.

As we can not rigorously measure their origin and therefore conclude if they are needed we can though observe reality as is now and conclude, by deduction, that if our analysis of human nature is right, the fact that we are not yet, and we were not in the past, a species intelligent enough to form any other more decentralized and dynamic protocol that the ones we eventually had.

Furthermore, if you take this valid logical deduction and observe the current world you see a lack of democracies everywhere, in fact most of societies are oligarcracies. Therefore you can even conclude reasonably that we nowadays do need oligarcracies.

There will be endless arguments of the winners and losers of recent history, on, this happened because you did this thing at this specific time, others will say, that is a lie!, others will say, no, this other factor had more influence etc Some will say, you could have avoided this!, the one who could have avoided this will say, there was no choice because of this, this and that! Some will think they could have done it better if they would have been given a chance etc etc

All of them, and the humans that will listen to them, will remain though in their two-dimensional natural human analysis of good and evil.

In a scenario with so may possibilities our imagination can think of but none can be empirically verified by most of us. Reinforcing the need for ideologies and for groups of: I believe this is what it happened.

In some conflicts, the people who were actually there and know the truth, if the majority ends up believing a lie, will feel resentment or hopelessness, the people who thought there was an alternative will feel betrayed or hopeless again, the people who lost believing they are right will feel revengeful or… you guessed it hopeless.

And so on and so forth, without no one every truly knowing with certainty if the winners did all they could, and even without knowing, if the winners had the capability to do what they seemed to be able to do. The further in time the conflict lies, and the more complex it was, the harder it will be for making everyone agree on what actually happened, what could have been done, and what should have been done.

Whatever all those variables were, because of our incapability or reconstructing the sequence of events hat lead to the end result, we might reasonably conclude in a belief, a belief of, overall, we did needed that end and there was “no other choice” than that. Specially if that end result happened lots of times at historically close times all over the world. Like the formation of oligarcracies in the last century.

This is a fair argument, which leads to the conclusion I mentioned before of: we are not intelligent enough.

Yet, this argument can be broken. For that we must not be blinded by the past we will never see with certainty, we must find a solution based on a future we can walk towards with consistency.

Said in a less philosophical, less poetical way. We can break that argument with the old and always appearing human nature of exploration: One thing is who you are and what build and conditioned you in the past, and another completely different thing is who you can become. The impulse to explore, intellectually and physically, for the pursuit of a better life without the errors of the pats will always be a thing.

Do you really think humans are made to accept their current limitations and say for log periods of time: Yeah, we must be satisfied with oligarcracies ? They will be for some time, don’t be a fool, but the ever growing complexity of wisdom arisen from the vital need for exploration will eventually destroy you if you resist.

And here, the only way I can think of someone still being in favor of oligarcracies goes with the following argumentation. By the way, I won’t bother in arguing in favor of plutocracy as is obvious that money does not correlate with intelligence, the trait needed for optimal societal coordination. Anyway, the argument goes as follows:

Developing technology correlates with intelligence so, Charles, what you are mentioning here is the ideal case, but in practice it is clearly seen and known that the people in the masses are, on average, less intelligent than the all mighty engineers.

So, to some extent, in a society which is unavoidably hierarchical like human ones, isn’t it better to maximize the intelligence of the people in “higher” positions of the organizational ladder and hence put technocrats there? Therefore, shouldn’t we aim for a technocracy? An oligarcracy of technocrats where anyone can opt to gain power as long as it is a proven intelligent technocrat?

Even if I accept your argument of the ever growing complexity of wisdom, shouldn’t we walk towards there on technocratic steps?

The base idea is that a technocrat is more fit than any other person to rule, to organize the political institutions. Because he knows how to solve complex problems.

Well, the first argument that demolishes this idea is the following: That is just not enough, a problem as complex as societal coordination at scale, by the very same complexity and by the very same definition of the problem, requires managing lots of people. Technocrats might not be good at that. As solving complex technological problems does not always involve managing lots of people. For example a software engineer that can understand and write a complex code without talking to anyone else.

The counter argument in order to keep supporting technocracy would be: But wait, what about technocrat CEOs (the big boss) that worked on large companies? They not only are proven to be intelligent but also “good enough” at managing people while satisfying desires for a larger group.

The counter argument to the counter argument follows as:

Well, that is true as long as this technocrat was a boss or organizer on its previous position and it was working in a highly competitive market. Technocrats coming from monopolistic or oligopolistic markets are not fit. The ones coming from competitive markets know how to minimize abuse to their workers, because either they are empathetic or they must do it enforced by the market. If you abuse to much, workers have the possibility of leaving to the competing business. At the same time this profile of person also knows how to solve a complex technical problem, this one being creating a product the market demands.

If the market was not competitive we end up in a situation where a very intelligent and powerful individual can trick others into being abused without them realizing, worker exploitation. Which, in the political realm, the analogous phenomena he would produce is corruption. And as we saw, corruption is an abusive act, which we have to minimize in order to have societies that coordinate better, without too much chaos, unpredictability.

Argument: But okay, you said it yourself, let’s then create a technocracy where the leaders are the individuals with those specific traits: Boss of a large company in a competitive market.

Counter arguments:

1) How many of those people do exist in the world? These are juts very few people and we are just too many.

Furthermore, even assuming there are now currently enough. What about where they live? What about the future? Creating the oligarchic requirement for aspiring to control power of “only if you are this type of technocrat” creates also other physical problems.

Even if it was true that the profile of a technical ex-CEO of a large business in a competitive market is the best institution’s manager, that does not guarantee there will be one of them for every region or terrain a society lives in. Relying on its existence for the system to work is an unnecessary risk and we must not forbid anyone for reaching a political position because of that.

A dynamic system where we encourage paying more attention to the described figures as potential leaders might just work better than enforcing their participation creating a risk of shortages.

A democratic mechanism is just more adaptive and we should aim for it. A techno-democracy I might argue, where it works as a democracy but at a cultural level people tend to pay more attention to the described figures as potential leaders.

Still, even if this is culturally technocratic, we are talking about democratic rules of the game now.

2) Furthermore, even if there were enough, they have already chosen to not be politicians. How would we convert them? Will they change their minds and be more exposed as a figure of a public institution?

3) And most fundamentally: What incentives will there exist to assure the minimization of abuse once they are in power? Quick market dynamics providing feedback loops of information on what is wrong do no exist here, we are in the power realm now.

These people might just had been nice to employers due to the competitive market they were in, and as seen, power knows no to little competitors in other protocols other than democracy.

So nothing systematically assures you that an abuse minimization will be found if someone reaches power. We would eventually be relying on a small group of people’s desires which can easily go against the people they would be ruling, in this case, ruling over, not ruling for. And, this tends to chaos and more unpredictability over time due to the every growing complexity of wisdom.

The feedback loop of information processing in a democracy enables a more dynamic existence better aligned with human intrinsic behavior, the one who has made us survive so far.

A feedback loop of a democracy is the one which is as dynamic as possible given the unavoidable conditions of societal coordination at scale, in this case the organization of power dynamics, which mimics and re-creates the economical reason on why competition matters and makes products better, but in the realm of power.

It is true that in an oligarcracy there can still be elections, but these are limited to the voices vetted directly or more indirectly, by the oligarchs. Which reduces the amount of information you can extract from the feedback loops, as some real but ignored groups would be left out, making it less useful and therefore worsening the prediction capabilities or problem solving capabilities of the ruling group. Due to this core undeniable structural inefficiency on the feedback loop structure that oligarcracies have, democracy is just better for human well-being. Harder to properly implement, but if achieved, better.

Just like market dynamics in perfect competition but in the realm of power. In perfect competition, anyone who knows how to make a better product can access the mean to create it and, from the worker side, can freely move to work to competing businesses if they are being abused. In perfect competition of power, everyone who has a vision for its society can create a group to reflect it and show it to its neighbors. And if their neighbors are not satisfied with the current one or think the new one is better, they can just move towards it, faster or slower, but towards it.

The only thing that makes us solve problems are feedback loops, fix a variable and unfix it, an action with an associated reaction that carries error correcting information with it (learning), and in democracy, that feedback loops is just richer thanks to the possibility of more diverse reactions that allow us to better understand reality and then react accordingly as per our goals and interests.

The core natural principle in favor on richer feedback loop has already been presented long ago. In section 4.1.4.- What we now know, what we did, and the way forward to optimize power dynamics.

There we realized the unavoidable reality of large enough human societies where people start demanding simplified truths for complex problems due to biological cognitive limits mixed with the laziness in intelligence maximization. Which leads to the known phenomena of demagogy.

Concluding that chapter, the following sentences appeared:

“The goal for advancing our civilization is to change the rules of the game for power so they don’t depend that much on simplified truths.

All this follows logically from our intrinsic adaptation technique of the fixed variable resolution technique which is leveraged as seen in power dynamics. Mastering the understanding and use of it by improving the information management flow will generate the least friction possible in our coexistence.”

That argumentation still holds even more true today, as of when I’m writing this. I’m even more convinced of it after reading Robert Michels and realizing that, even in industrial times, societies still had the issue of the “stupid mass that can not comprehend”. However, in times where information accessing friction has been dramatically decreased, we have not yet found an improvement of the stupid mas. Signaling either that this effect will actually exist but takes one or two more generations to consolidate, or, signaling that there is something more fundamental in humans or our societal structures which makes the mass remain stupid.

It practice I think both are true, most of people don’t take as a core philosophy and goal for life the maximization of intelligence, and educational systems, as an example of pivotal societal structure, are made for the old times needs of learning capabilities. However, as we slowly or more quickly manage to get rid of this, I do think that the rules of the game for power and the technical application of them will depend way less of simplified truths.

In that section we saw how simplified truths will likely not lead us to correct solutions, specially in the modern world. Because they are ultimately guided by emotions, a biological tool coded for our tribal times, not the modern ones. A tool that will likely fail, one because the scenario now is more complex, and second because it is new and the solution, therefore, will also require some degree of novelty.

Not only this but as mentioned there too, simplified truths help nothing when controlling chaos:

“Artificial rivals deduced from a real intellectual effort to describe a problem, which might be true and real, but both of its simplified derived dichotomies are wrong to some extent as they have been created through a simplification of reality. And when simplifying you always miss little details that in complex systems tend to be crucial when trying to minimize chaos.

(...)

All these dichotomies, for learning purposes are not bad, but, for solving real life complex systems, they are. Those little details are as important as the whole. A small perturbation in the complex systems we live in can cause unpredicted, and probably undesired, consequences. Just like butterfly effects.”

Therefore, to shape a prosperous society in which we can figure out our best future possible and walk towards it, we should rely on as little simplified truths as possible.

Democracy, as per its richer feedback loop mechanism, allows the greatest minds to use their thinking more often and in more effective ways. The minds that apply the critical thinking and diminish the simplified truths phenomena.

Whereas in more centralized and static protocols, these minds are likely silenced and can not efficiently execute the act of critical thinking. Increasing the amount of simplified truths with all the known risks we have observed from them, like poorer feedback loops.

But, and big but, all this is true as long as your entity is capable of processing the information without overheating.

As said on the economics part, sometimes we do need this simpler models to exist because we can not manage to create nor understand collectively the functioning of more complex ones. But that should not make us ignore or deny the superiority of the more complex ones. We must acknowledge our starting point, think like an engineer, figure out improvements, and work towards them.

I can only keep thinking of more staticness-risks that a technocracy brings with it. So, again, even if it is realistic and logical for certain kinds of technocrats to perform better, we should not just systematically await for them to appear in a big enough amount and after that, to wait and pray so their desires are aligned with ours, for the functioning of our societies. We should aim for the system on its own to reflect the trends of a functioning thriving and lasting society. So in practice we do not improve at the pace of exceptions, but at the pace of us just existing, regardless of exceptions and even benefiting more from them when they occur, as they will have a voice so everyone takes them into account.

We can keep cycling the argumentation in favor of oligarcracies by recycling on and on with different wording the “gun-to-monkey” principle:

Argument: But opening the gate to non-technocrats creates the risk of someone really bad at managing getting the role.

Counter-argument: That is true, but you will never delete that. Freedom is the ability to explore, and exploring brings risk with it, always. The only way to make sure the negative side of the risk does not appear or it appears as less as possible is with responsibility. The ability to recognize the failure points and taking charge of them.

And democratic systems, as they align representatives with represented, create responsibility. Minimizing always this risk.

Furthermore, because they have a richer feedback loop than oligarcracies, the information and detection of this risk is improved. Assuming the individuals represented are intelligent enough to handle it. Which is a logical assumption in a society that is successfully managing a complex democratic protocol.

Yet only technocracies, do not minimize any inherent risk, in fact they have the inherent risk of not existing enough profile-matching-technocrats. They are systematically more fragile while democracy is systematically designed to be risk minimized. And I’m not even mentioning the annihilating argument which I’m tired of mentioning already: the every growing complexity of human wisdom.

Facing the risk of a bad leader through revocable representation of anyone is more effective than facing the risks of gate-closing the system to a select few.

Furthermore, thanks to this, democracy also opens the door for other types of specialist to appear, those specialized on the management of their region. And these masters can learn from the technocrats, while at the same time the technocrats can just mind their own business, literally, ruling their own business way better.

This is the already known benefit that the idea of specialization in the production process brings. Technocracies give technocrats the responsibility of also managing and having to worry about power and the nuances of regions, giving way more variables to them and increasing the likelihood of poor performance or failure.

Democracy is better because these power and region specific specialists can be created with the temporary technocrat help with organizational techniques teaching and then each one follows its own path more efficiently. The principle of revocability allows the technocrats to delegate to the masses that role. Now it is up to the masses to do it right.

If a technocrat does not support it then it just means that he does not trust the masses. Like not giving an employee a role because you don’t trust it will do it right. The “gun-to-monkey” principle.

But again, if the masses show a clear understanding of democracy and how to implement and manage it, then democracy is superior too due to this separation of concerns mechanic that it enables. And due to all the so many times mentioned other benefits of dynamism and decentralization for human problem solving.

We could be going, on and on, thinking about arguments and counter arguments, crafting specific examples of scenarios where democracy is superior, and where certain kinds of oligarcracies are superior too. As we saw at the very beginning, everything is just statistics, and almost anything is theoretically possible to happen at some point in time.

As you might have seen, the only way to attack democracy is by destroying one of its pillars, what if people vote something that was actually wrong, like not being able to discern a valid leader/organizer? But the same critique can be made to oligarchic systems with voting. And here we go again, what if we give a gun to a monkey? What if we bite more than we can chew?

Quite an useless critique because we are ultimately saying: what if X is capable of Y but X happens not to be capable of Y in a percentage of the time, and that time arrives? Theoretically logical critique, yet useless for any informed action. As it carries no information because it is always true for any X and Y.

Human existence is way bigger than politics or economics, if we aim to systematically improve it, we must aim to understand all vital sections of it, and education and intelligence are a crucial part too.

Do we need oligarchies as per the current state of the world? Seems like it. Should we accept this and that is it?  Clearly not, we are made to keep refining our systems or as we have seen, a perfect storm will come and we will become extinguished. The next step is clear, democracy… Or is it? More on the following sections.

To start wrapping this up, supporting a technocracy, after all these arguments, can only be done by follows similar reasons on wether to make drug consumption illegal or to just educate and make people very aware of its bad consequences.

Everyone knows the second way makes sense, but still some oppose it because they do not trust themselves or their neighbors’ capability of executing it. Again, and for the last time, the gun-to-monkey principle.

Everyone knows democracy makes more sense than technocracy but the ones who defend technocracy do not trust themselves or others into properly creating and handling a democracy. At a national level, given education and deep thought, not choosing democracy is fundamentally based on trust issues.

These are solved by education, learning, defeating intellectual laziness, listening and communicating calmly to foster trust.

At international levels, due to the absence of a Wolrd Government, in scenarios of crisis, not having a democracy might arise too from a stronger foreign nation influencing yours in such a chaotic way that create those trust issues in order to better control you as more centralized and static systems are better to control. But not because your society is not ready for a democracy, but because it is being abused by another, or other, nations, consciously or unconsciously at both parts of the abusive pair.

Again, the other nation that would be abusing yours might be doing it, a analyzed, by 2 reasons, lack of intelligence of figuring out better ways of interacting with you, or, thinking it is capable of controlling you without generating too much chaos it can not control.
Regardless of the motivations for the abuse, at some point, if you want your society to be more decentralized and dynamic the solution of education, learning etc etc will be required. Once that is done, there are multiple ways to handle the relation with the abusive nation or nations, but that will be discussed in a later section.
Concluding, even if today we need oligarcracies because we can not manage to peacefully transition to democracies, I aim for democracy. Because it is in the human nature to learn, teach, explore and keep refining the processes that make this life more enjoyable.

X.- Conclusion 8.2.1

For all these reasons explained through the 8.2.2 sections, I aim for democracy, for now. Notice I did not say choose, I said aim for. It depends on the context.

In our current context, I do not think democracies are possible, but, precisely because of that I’m putting my life’s effort in improving everyone’s education on how to maximize their intelligence and gather useful knowledge so they do become capable of a peaceful transition into creating, managing and maintaining democratic systems.

As with the economics part: I do not think we should aim for plutocracies or technocracies, or any kind of oligarcracy, or dictatorship. But, current world observations as the lack of libertarian economies and the lack of democracies in the world seem to indicate the centralized and static models are the only viable solutions for now.

So, again, I aim for democracy, and probably, I aim for anarchism too, yet in the far future, one where we can actually realistically think about it. A pity that by then I will have likely died by natural causes.

8.2.1.- On how to create a democratic system. A glimpse into the complexity.

Here I will give my best attempt to explain a democratic design and showcase technical ideas to actually implement it. I’m currently working on creating a constitution that is usable in any society that aims to be democratic based on these principle and more. At the end of the day, the design of checks and balances a democracy requires is very aligned to the hacker’s mindset I’ve developed and to the nature of the systems I’m specialized in: CDNs (Consensus based Database Networks), most popularly know nowadays as blockchain or cryptocurrencies.

All I learned about from the other realm of knowledge that political science is was created by Antonio García Trevijano, another Spanish human, rest in peace.

Trevijano wrote all his thoughts on what actually is democracy and how to create it, in general but also showcasing the specific Spanish case on his book: Teoría Pura De La República Constitucional.

It is a hard to read book because it uses old and complex words and it has lots of references to other philosophers’ concepts, historical facts etc And as far as I know it is only in Spanish. Fortunately enough we got AI. If you want to read it just copy-paste pages of the book and translate it to english.

This being said, we can understand as democracy a political regime characterized by its decentralization and dynamism.

That it is achieved via allowing small amounts of people to create new power aspirants and via separating the capabilities of the State into three different independent entities.

The decentralization and dynamism is created in the hope that it will lead to lower degrees of abuse and greater degrees of adaptation.

As per decentralized and dynamic systems, their design and inner workings are more complex than other more centralized or static systems.

Due to their natural by design complexity, the creation of such a system can only be achieved with higher amounts of intelligence than other simpler systems.

On top of that, if the democratic system is wrongly designed, by natural forces as explained, will tend to collapse or risks collapsing in more centralized and static regimes.

Thus, due to their complexity and their nature, stable lasting democracies require more intelligent individuals for their conception and maintenance.

So, a democracy, if we do not care about how much it lasts, is defined by:

