8.- Thoughts on the ideal society, final part: On how to transition to an utopia, putting it all together.

8.1.- The axioms, or essence, of human existence.

We have explored and understood the biological behavior of humans as individuals. All are instincts forged in genetics to drive us to survive and create slightly diverse offspring.

Once survival is assured with food, water and security, then the main core focus shifts to reaching happiness. All this as a biological mechanism to reward exploration so to have better chances of adapting to unexpected changes. This increase in chances is given by the increased amount of information we gathered in the exploration. Therefore the more combinations or order we might manage to imagine and create so to face the natural chaos.

This is what drives all human individuals. But, before all comes survival, and humans biologically need others to survive. So we can not deeply understand the system of human species without understanding the relationships between them.

The same way we can not understand physics by looking at just one atom. Even if we understood how and why the atom moves in empty space, the reality is that there are more atoms around which influence the observed one.

For that we analyzed the interactions involving more than one human. We explored and understood all the key different aspects of their interactions: physical capabilities and information management ones.

Then we used that understanding to analyze how their power dynamics work and how they use them to distribute resources while trying to guarantee survival and then optimize for happiness.

During all these, we saw a fundamental human biological trait: their brain cannot process rationally all the information it can receive. So it must find mechanisms to slow it down and try to make use of it.

From this biological, intrinsic to all individuals mechanism, remixed with the understanding of the biological reactions that fuel individual survival and species maintenance (basic survival needs and happiness), is that we can start to make sense of the interactions that regard more than one individual.

From this is how we can explain and understand all the higher level concepts humans use to label, bring to life and understand their power dynamics and resource management protocols. Or in other words, their societal existence.

We can unite, in an intellectual way, and in an identity to a group way, all the higher level concepts, regardless of their seemingly antagonistic nature at higher levels, via reasoning through these biological principles. Thus with this reaching a reconciliation and a reformulation of the apparent contradictions emergent in analysis at higher levels. Allowing us to manipulate them, use them and understand them with greater accuracy.

Everything there is to understand in human societies can be understood by the survival and evolutionary biological principles plus the human brain internal chemical mechanics which ultimately are programmed to, so far successfully, follow these principles to reach the goals.

From the fact of how humans process information we can distinguish the logical appearance of the ideas of “the variable concepts” and “the fixed concepts” that create a dynamic dance inside our brain’s chemical configurations to guide us through life, or reality.

The fixed chemical biological structures form beliefs and the dynamic plastic nature they sometimes acquire creates exploration, gives birth to dynamism.

Thus from a static-dynamic natural analysis, a fixing and varying, we can understand any human created concept.

We have done this through this book with economics, politics and ethics for example.

At the end of the day, at the beginning and the end of truth, if we want to agree and coordinate on something, we must reason on top of these static-dynamic analytical principles. Which in “reality” can be also understood as mechanics, rather than principles, if you define them in a more dynamic way. Note in this paragraph the limitations of my human brain on the intent to describe accurately, precisely, in one statement, its dual (more than one) nature.

As explained, one of the most primitive ways, in the sense of old and simple, to reconcile, understand and then use this nature inside societies, has been historically named as ethics, the labeling process of stuff as good or evil.

An ever changing dynamic nature, with a necessary static point of reference to work around. Sounds really similar to how modern day physics even works, like the theory of relativity of Albert Einstein.

Is this theory a natural real rule, or just a biased theory appearing from the internal workings of our reasoning brain processing the information? A theory created by the brain to explain what the very same brain measures, the summit of truth, a being defining itself, and doomed to be right, because he is its own inventor and invention.

I will step away from these questions for now, let’s go back to human societal workings.

We all work with the same reasoning, yet maybe, with different fixed points, fixed variables. Sharpening our ability to travel between points better and faster will make us be sharper humans, more sophisticated and advanced.

No matter what you do, these are the axioms, the essence, of human existence:

- The moment you name, the moment you fix, everything else will be perceived as if it changes.

- You can choose different angles to perceive it from. And everything will be the same reality, yet it will look different, due to the angle chosen, the variables fixed.

The key is to coordinate our dance around reality, even if looked from different angles, even if dancing different styles, in harmonious ways, without clashing.

Assume, fix, for this visual metaphor of human existence, that, whatever reality is, it is a sphere. And we are dancing around it, because we love it, because it is beautiful if you will or because we are meant to do that biologically if you are more scientific. Yet there is a bunch of us dancing around, from different angles.

Some will be dancing together, some alone, but we will all be forever dancing around that sphere. The key is to not clash or push each other against that sphere, because it hurts.

The key is to respect the sphere, because it is just like this, our common god if you like, and coordinate our dances so we contemplate together the sphere as we dance.

This is why everything might be true, if worded properly, if thought properly, because we are in the same reality, just describing it from different angles, different contexts. And, fortunately enough, or just realistically enough, the words and actions we chose don’t necessarily need to clash.

We have seen it throughout the book, in any sort of human concepts and protocols.

Good luck being human, let’s keep dancing without clashing. That is how we thrive.















8.1.1.- Another example of the human existence’s axioms. The different ways of living love.

The other day, while pondering about why people are monogamous in most of the world, I realized it was a nice example of how we humans dance around the sphere just with different styles.

Said without metaphors: It served as a perfect example on how we all describe the same reality but with different points of view, different words, different contexts yet that mold and describe ultimate concepts or realities we all share.

Personally, I’ve never practiced monogamy. In modern times this is widely understood with the meaning of having just one romantic partner and bonded, necessarily too, not by just romance but also by the sexual exclusivity for each other.

I logically thought, since I had the ability to get horny, that monogamy was not natural. My thought process was simple, we have the desire to have sex with multiple people, yet some eventually constrain it to only one, thus, as it is a byproduct of a choice and not a natural thing to do via instinct, it is anti-natural. Yet I was wrong, evil some might even say, but for sure, at the very least, I lacked a deeper understanding of the concept. Monogamy is natural, in the same way that me, a polyamorous human, also is. An actually accurate term I should have used to describe monogamy is: anti-biological. Yet humans, as seen, are not always lead by biological instinctual reactions. We dance according to our context, and our context is created by the very natural way we process the information, by the very natural way from which we try to order the chaos. Thus, natural must be.

While reflecting about this, I realized really interesting ways of describing what I felt about monogamy. Via doing economical and ideological parallelisms. Then later I realized I was just being human, like described in the previous section.

In this section you will find a critique to monogamy, and you will find it, correctly criticizing it with opposing concepts. Showing once more how seemingly opposing incompatible ideas and existences are compatible, are “coordinate-able”, if done intelligently, if analyzed from lower, deeper levels instead of from higher, more “brute“ levels.

I must add a disclaimer. Even if I do not practice monogamy, I do not think it is unnatural nor damaging. I acknowledge and observe human existence and fully understand that for some people, in their own contexts, works marvelously. For that I only have to look at my parents. They have been together for 25 years practicing monogamy and they are clearly super happy with each other. I, with my personality and context, could not do it.

The following sections are worded purposefully to feel a bit like a direct critique, almost like an attack to monogamy and to some other human concepts I mentioned. Yet this is only done to showcase better what I explained in the previous section.

How wording matters, how understanding matters, how respecting the sphere and other’s movements so not to clash against it matters. How we can fix different variables yet coordinate and understand each other, thriving, solving problems, adapting to reality.

Say no more, here it comes.

8.1.1.1.- The capitalist hate on monogamy. And the socialist one. Same reality, different fixed variables, successful coordination.

First let’s see what a more libertarian, anarchist, “freedom-prioritizer” would say against monogamy. These people have clearly fixed some variables on their lives.

Then, we will explore the same reasons but from a more socialist, controlling or protective or “empathy-prioritizer” mindset.

Then we will see that both, regardless of the different variables fixed in other areas of human existence, are trying to describe and adapt to the same concept, the same reality.

I got lazy and curious the moment I was writing this section, so I wrote the critiques with my ideas yet explained and written up by an AI:

```
MANIFESTO: Love Does Not Enclose — Against Monogamy as A Socialist Control of Instinct

We’ve been taught to equate love with sexual exclusivity. The prevailing belief says that if you truly care for someone, you will only desire them — forever, without exception. But this idea isn’t rooted in love; it’s built on fear, insecurity, and the need for control. Monogamy is not the same as love. In many cases, it becomes a structure of control disguised as emotional commitment.

Control is not the same as care. Imagine your partner dictated what you eat, when and how you eat it, who you eat with, what cutlery you use, or even how you drink water. That level of control would be seen as absurd — yet controlling sex is accepted in monogamous relationships, despite it being equally intrusive to our natural instincts.

It’s normal for people in relationships to make agreements about practical things: schedules, chores, how the home functions. That’s part of living together. But it’s an entirely different matter when someone tries to control a fundamental biological impulse like sexual desire. Wanting to control your partner’s sexuality is not the same as deciding together on household logistics. Instincts, like hunger or thirst, are elemental. Trying to limit it is a denial of the other person’s nature.

Sexual attraction does not disappear with a promise or a ring. It doesn’t vanish because of love, nor is it easily suppressed by ethics. What suppresses it is fear — and when fear enters, freedom exits. Submission replaces autonomy. Sex is part of human life. It isn’t a contractual privilege that can be negotiated away. It is not something to be granted or denied through rules and boundaries.

Monogamy often functions like a form of sexual socialism, bringing all negative effects socialism has. Daddy State promises stability and emotional security. It frames itself as being in your best interest — for the sake of the relationship. But it leads to repression, to internal conflict, to double lives, and often, to heartbreak. It demands a denial of desire, of instinct, of biological truth. 

Some humans find comfort in slavery — not literal, but the kind where freedom is exchanged for the illusion of safety. It is a voluntary kind of enslavement, but one that goes so deep it reaches into the core of who we essentially are. As Benjamin Franklin said, “Those who would give up essential liberty to purchase a little temporary safety, deserve neither liberty nor safety.” While that quote might not apply to everything, when it comes to sexual desire, it fits; surrendering your intimate freedom in exchange for emotional security is not love — it’s submission.

To love someone is to respect them, not to possess them. A partner who feels the need to forbid your desires is not protecting you; they are trying to control you because they do not feel secure without owning you. A confident, loving partner doesn’t fear your desire. They don’t need to dominate. They earn your respect by being present, honest, and free.

Imposed monogamy is not love. It is fear wearing the mask of protection. We were not born to obey sexual monopolies. We were born to live, to connect, to experience desire, and to love without cages.

Real love doesn’t require confinement. It doesn’t need legal conditions. It doesn’t say, “If you love me, you’ll never want anyone else.” Real love says, “I choose you freely, every day — even though you don’t have to choose me.” That is the essence of love.

This is the manifesto. Read it. Reflect on it. Live freely.
```

Now let’s say the same but from a modern socialist view hating on capitalism and libertarianism:

```
MANIFESTO: Love Does Not Enclose — Monogamy as Capitalist Ownership

Monogamy is often sold to us like a product. We are told that if we truly love someone, we must “own” them, keep them under lock and key, and claim exclusive rights over their body and desires. This is not love — it is the logic of capitalism, dressed up as romance. It teaches us to treat our partner like private property, something to be guarded, controlled, and negotiated over, as though a relationship were a corporate contract with endless clauses and fine print.

Under this capitalist illusion, love becomes transactional. We trade fidelity for security, desire for stability, freedom to love for the illusion of ownership. Just as capitalism thrives on scarcity and control, monogamy feeds on fear: fear of losing what we think we own, fear of not being “enough,” fear of the natural abundance of human desire. Monogamy is not love — it is the commodification of love, a social contract that mirrors the worst aspects of the market.

Control is not care. Imagine living with a boss who dictates every aspect of your life — what you eat, who you talk to, when you rest. You would call it exploitation. Yet, when this control is in your sexual activity, society tells us it’s “romantic.” Monogamy takes the raw, natural instinct of sexual desire and subjects it to the same managerial logic as a corporation. It says: “Your body, your time, your feelings belong to me.” It privatizes one of our natural instincts.

Sexual attraction, like creativity, cannot be owned or monopolized. You can’t sign a contract to make it disappear. Capitalism tries to turn everything into property — land, labor, ideas — and monogamy extends that logic into our most intimate selves. It tells us to repress our desires for the sake of “the relationship,” the same way workers are systematically coerced to repress their needs for the sake of “the company.” Repression always breeds resentment, double lives, black insecure markets outside of legality and eventual collapse.

Monogamy is sexual capitalism. It sells stability like a false product: promising happiness while quietly demanding the sacrifice of instinct and autonomy. It enforces scarcity — the idea that your partner’s love and attention is a resource you must hoard, guard, and defend. It creates a market of jealousy and competition, where your value depends on being “the only one,” rather than being freely chosen. Like capitalism, it teaches us to measure worth in ownership and exclusivity, instead of freedom and mutual respect.

Some people accept this system, just as some accept exploitation at work, thinking it’s the only way to survive. But this is not liberation — it’s a self-imposed form of servitude. So long as we believe that love requires ownership, we remain trapped in the ideology of private property.

Karl Marx once said: “The property-owning class and the class of the proletariat represent the same human self-alienation.” Applied to love, this means that turning our partners into property alienates us from our own capacity to love freely. When we enforce control, we do not connect — we dominate. We reproduce the same oppressive structures that alienate workers from their labor, only now in our most intimate spaces.

To love is to resist the capitalist logic of ownership. A partner who demands control over your desire is not loving you — they are treating you like a resource they must guard. True love does not need contracts, conditions, or monopolies. A strong partner does not fear your freedom. They stand with you as an equal, not as a manager of your instincts.

Imposed monogamy is not love. It is a capitalist cage, built on fear and control. We were not born to sign emotional contracts. We were born to live collectively, to share abundance, to love without turning each other into property.

Real love does not say, “If you love me, you’ll never want anyone else.” Real love says, “I choose you freely, every day — even though you are not mine to own.” That is the liberation of love.

This is the manifesto. Read it. Reflect. Break free from the capitalist chains of monogamy.
```

Enough AI, back to my words.

As you can see, they both are talking about the same reality of that love, a kind of 2 people relationship to live life together, requires human agreement, coexistence and coordination.

Both criticize until which extent these required agreements are ethical to make. Abstracted away from ideologies, they are trying to answer: Should we agree on controlling our couple’s natural sexual desire?

And both, abstracted away from ideologies, answer that no, we should not control it.

Reality, however, is more complex than any reasoning derived from fixed ideological variables can describe.

There are contexts where monogamy is really useful for a society. Where its presence, due to the context the society lives in, brings more freedom or happiness than the one that sexually takes away. This is true not only at societal levels, but also couple-wise levels.

Some couples will be happier being monogamous not because they enjoy controlling others, or because they have trust issues and fear abandonment, but just because it is the best option for their current situation. Like imagine a couple where they are very old, why would they bother in finding other sexual or love partners if both likely have sexual desires pretty much turned off.

To be honest I’m not the best at finding examples of when monogamy is benefitial, my polyamorous instinct finds it hard to imagine. But I’m sure there must be, otherwise it would not be as present.

Fortunately, I’ve started feeling interest and I’ve started reading other people’s thoughts. Among them I’m reading Robert Michels’ book: Political Parties: A Sociological Study of the Oligarchical Tendencies of Modern Democracy. And there it was explained beautifully that, for example, monogamy gives a man greater assurances that his children will be his and from none other. In cultures where being the father of someone or the kid of someone is very important, like in dynasties, for their social coordination, monogamy might be an essential part of culture to assure a non-chaotic functioning of society.

Anyway, this chapter is not meant to discuss on if we should be monogamous or not according to our current modern context. That is something that each of us, thinking about our contexts, will have to figure out.

I just wanted to emphasize how people, with different variables fixed, can still coordinate and discuss the same topics without necessarily clashing. In the texts showcased, we saw how people with seemingly antagonistic points of view about human economical coordination, libertarians and socialists, could agree on not being monogamous, which is just another type of human coordination. Therefore revealing the deeper, lower level nature of the problem when analyzed from different parts of overlapping spectra at higher level dimensions. The problem was actually how to handle agreements and coordination on human sexual relations.

If we had just bothered to analyze everything from the context, from the fixed variables, of economical coordination protocols, even though we would have talked about coordination and we can reach similar conclusions using meanings related to the coordination action, we would have not reached full agreement because we would be fixing too much variables, even incorrect ones, like thinking of economic coordination instead of the real deeper other topic of coordination, sexual and romantic coordination, we were actually discussing.

With these protocols of love analysis I wanted to showcase how reality can always be more complex than what any ideology based thinking can describe it as. And the potential risks of creating higher levels, avoidable, conflicts, by fixing too much variables. As seen, two poliamorous people can think the other person’s text is worthless because they might be reading it from “a bias”, a thought process where too much variables were fixed while trying to understand a part of reality which, even if overlapping and similar, is different.

In this case we analyzed a system of two humans solving a coordination problem in a relation so to enjoy and share their sexual and romantic lives together. Green circle in the image.

Which, as seen, it can be understood as a relation of desires or instincts and economics. If you fix yourself with the fixed ideas of any of the capitalist or socialist protocols mentioned, you will likely just miss the deeper nature and components of what you are analyzing: humans relation with love and sexual desire.

From the image, your thought would have wandered around the red area and the intersection of it with the green area if you remained fixed in the assumptions of socialism, and you would have completely missed and never reached the green part that goes far beyond an economical analysis. Therefore, limiting yourself in the ways you can sail in this blue sea of reality we have on the picture, so as to satisfy your goals, order your chaos, in more diverse and versatile ways.
Ultimately, in more complex and sophisticated ways that can avoid conflict with your neighbors. Like agreeing on non-monogamy even if having different economical ideas, fixed variables. Not only this but the realization of common ground, as explained in the chapter of world peace, promotes to not to perceive humans as “the other”. But someone more like us, like our group. Further promoting more sophisticated dialogue and less chaotic coordination.

Note that, starting the analysis from ideology is not incorrect perse. If you start thinking about it with both ideologies, one at a time, then draw similarities, you will be able to realize the points in common, which fortunately are very handy for analyzing the system at its root, on its nature. Thanks to it being analyzed from different yet complementary points of view.

Here we see again what I’ve mentioned along the book, we should use labels because they are necessary, but not as a truth, but a guide towards it. And for similar reasons this is why names do not really matter that much, what mattes is the thinking capabilities and understanding.

This is precisely why we should not be proud of ideological confrontation, we should praise thinking, talking, putting intellectual effort in finding common ground and then coordinate in the seek of deeper truths better aligned with the reality we share. We must strive for and we should crave for intelligence and deeper analysis. Especially with the people who might have fixed different variables in similar aspects of life, because then, we can unveil a greater understanding and sailing skills through reality.

Keeping the previous poetry, we must keep dancing, whatever style we prefer, without clashing, around the sphere. Let’s keep the party of life going.

8.1.2.- A more modern version of good and evil, of left and right.

In modern times, when solving complex problems at higher levels of societal structures, people use 2 sides: left and right. Sometimes the figure of the center appears, but it has been mostly anecdotal.

These terms are vague on purpose, they are like good and evil, terms that shapeshift across history. What is good now might be evil in 20 years, what was left-wing 20 years ago now might be right wing.

Ultimately it is because of the human biology we explained. These words are just labels we use to commonly agree on what to do in the current context.

As time passes and context changes, different labels might be used upon the same idea.

We already know the common ground here, the objective definition of good and evil:

``Good and bad are those things that have seemed to grant this better or worse likelihood of survival and happiness according to an individual or group of people’s personalities and their nature around them.``

Left and right are exactly the same. It is just that these words are often used when talking about political and economical solutions to the problems of coordinating power dynamics and resource management.

We have seen over and over again that these labels are incomplete. They always simplify reality. So here I will propose labels that do not, or at least, that resonate closer to our nature.

Labels that hopefully help us think better. Yet, we must not be proud of being guided by labels, we should aim for taking action based on dialogue with others, not by just labels. We must  be guided by dialogue, specially dialogue with those tending to use opposing labels.

Now, before proposing my labels, let me explain something important to understand why I think they can help us think better.

8.1.2.1.- A key difference, correct and incorrect answers are not the same as good and bad answers.

So correct and incorrect are things that are scientifically correct, that can be concluded by the laws of physics or any science, by anyone, anywhere, anytime.

Things like, assuming you are on Earth’s surface and have human strength:

If I throw the spear upwards, it will fall downwards.

A scientific fact.

Knowledge can be labeled scientific if it follows the following principles:

- It can always be used to predict the future.
- It can always be replicated or discovered by anyone or any group.

So, solutions like, if I’m thirsty drinking water will make me not thirsty is a correct solution. Is it a good solution though? In this case yes, because it promotes your survival and even happiness.

Is throwing a spear to hunt a deer when hungry a correct solution to the problem of not being able to eat it? It depends, will the deer be dead or injured enough so you can physically control it? Then it is correct, if the deer scapes, it is incorrect.

Is it good or bad? Well, that will depend on if hunting that deer is needed for your survival or if it makes you happy.

But what about the deer? It is clearly bad for it.

Actions that include more than 1 individual are not always objectively good or evil. It depends on the point of reference. Because we have then two brains processing reality, thus what for one is a static part defined as truth, for the other one it might also be a static part but fixed as something false. From this extra bit of information we gather new extra combinations. When there was one individual it was either one or zero: 0 or 1. Now we have two individuals and each of them can be zero or one (false or truth), thus we got 4 possible combinations: 0 and 0, 0 and 1, 1 and 0, 1 and 1.

We must understand that, in the same way correct and incorrect are the basic labels we use to guide logic and science from the perspective of one observer. Good and evil are this very same concept of basic labels. Which we use to guide the judging process on actions that pertain to more than 1 individual.

Generally speaking, labels we apply when we have more than a single being interacting in opposing ways to each solve one problem or both a common one.

Thus, to label a solution we must take into account 2 positions, the individual and the other. Or others.

There are 4 combinations possible as seen:

- Good for individual, good for others. (Example: Hunts a deer and shares it with others.)
- Good for individual, bad for others. (Example: Starves others by hiding the hunted deer.)
- Bad for individual, good for others. (Example: Kills an individual which was killing others.)
- Bad for individual, bad for others.  (Example: Nuclear bombing each other.)

There are 2 dimensions, 2 variables, the individual point of existence and the other point of existence. Whereas with correct and incorrect there is only one, whether it is true or not. 

Combinations for logical conclusions:

- It is true. (Example: If I throw a spear upwards it falls downwards.)
- It is false. (Example: If I throw a spear upwards it becomes a speaking banana and teaches me to be a ninja master.)

Fixing some variables is perceiving something as good or bad. It does not necessarily mean it is correct or good and incorrect or bad, but that the analyzer chooses to perceive it as so.

That election of label just marks an election, and nothing else in the logic realm.

Good and evil, even if they are basic labels, they are not a logical deduction. They will always be subjective, depending on the observer.

From the point of view of this poor deer we have been mentioning, all is bad, regardless of correct or incorrect statements, we have been trying to kill him over and over again.

Question people who say that answers to social problems are the correct thing to do or the right thing to do. Like if it was logical, a guarantee. They might maliciously or accidentally think they are intelligent enough so to be an omniscient god.

Also don’t just trust those who say, this is the good thing to do, they can also be wrong, as good and bad are just perceptions, our perceived as most correct guess when fixing variables. This is why dialogue is key when coordinating with others. Because jut one human brain easily leads to more inefficient and inadequate conclusions in matters of increasing complexity involving multiple beings.

I think understanding this distinction can be helpful to promote dialogue.

Every time I say something is good or bad, I mean it this way, as a time constrained perception, not as an assured reality.

Now you might have realized we are severely relying on using a one dimensional approach (left or right wing) to guide our complex, 2 dimensional dilemma, of organizing societies of more than one individual.

Therefore, we are tending to miss other parts of reality and this is limiting the complexity and quality of our solutions to problems at a species level. Thus here I propose:

8.1.2.2.- The new left and right, a two dimensional and natural approach.

Finally here they are, the new left and right are:

1.- Centralized / Decentralized.
2.- Static / Dynamic.

These two pairs should aid modern humans to better analyze problems according to their two dimensional societal nature and not according to a one dimensional ideological limited analysis.

Aiding them to only fix the variables who are necessary in each moment and reduce the tendency to oversimplify realty, a.k.a. fix too much variables at once.

The reason behind this is that these pairs are chosen based on biological human principles that are correct and incorrect.

They are not based on ideas of matters involving multiple individuals which can be good or bad.

Let’s explain the pairs.

Centralized vs Decentralized:

A solution is centralized when:

More variables can be fixed per user with power than in the decentralized alternative.

And a solution is decentralized when:

Less variables can be fixed per user with power than in the centralized alternative.

This way, we promote to start discussing with labels that align scientifically with reality.

The first reason on why they align is because of the presence on their definition of the biological information processing functioning of our brain. It respects and acknowledges the human problem solving method of the fixed variable resolution technique.

And second, it is scientific because of the logical part of it. As the variables handled can be named and counted, a.k.a. measured. And the same can be said as per users that will hold power. So there can not be an arbitrary, feelings-based dispute over what is a more centralized or decentralized solution, you jut have to think and count the factors.

Static vs Dynamic:

A solution is static when:

Includes more variables which become fixed and/or for longer time than in the dynamic alternative.

And dynamic when:

Includes less variables which become fixed and/or for lesser time than in the static alternative.

With these we complement the previous pair. We do not only have to decide who handles more variables, but how many and for how long.

So now we have encapsulated in our labels all components of a living being’s reality: being capable (power), time and amounts.

As said, time is measurable, amount of variables is measurable, capability of action is measurable, so these labels are scientific. Thus they should promote a more critical thinking process, even if requiring the humanly unavoidable mere existence of a label, of a fixed variable.

Both label pairs can be used together or separately to judge solutions to problems. Leading to a more human-nature-aligned decision taking. Taking into account our shared reality instead of abusively, or in a brute way, prioritizing individual ones.

As you might have noticed, I’ve clearly used these labels when analyzing resource management protocols in chapter 5.

The main goal of someone who is truly critical is to first, if desired, use labels like these ones to start the thinking. This is basically step one of thinking like an engineer: define stuff with names, adjectives etc. Then, actually complete all the other steps of thinking like an engineer.

Sure, again rational thinking can’t always be done, for example if resources are truly limited. I just hope that these new labels can be useful for modern humans to start their path into critical thinking.

These 2 pairs of labels presented are just a less biased, zero-biased due to their scientific nature I would dare to say, start.

As you have more options with this 2-dimensional approach, more meanings can be uncovered in the initial understanding. Whereas using traditional left and right, which is just 1 pair of variables, leads to a poorer initial understanding.

Anyway, until we get to the point where everyone just thinks like an engineer and people do not start conflict just by shallow poorer labels, these 2 pairs should serve as a fresh more efficient start.

To reiterate and conclude this section, remember, labels are not truth, just a guide, a compass, but we must move using the compass to seek solutions, we must not stay where we are forever.

8.2.- Patterns on answers and why democracy, for now.

Earlier in the book, in chapter 4, I mentioned that I think the best power dynamics protocol is democracy. But I did not explain much in detail why. That was because it was harder to explain without presenting to you the 2 label pairs (2 dimensions) from the previous section.

As a brief curiosity, the reasons that made this harder were the following:

If we approach power from a more ethical, good and evil, one dimensional, wording, we risk leaving the nature of pure capability out of the thinking table. If we think jut with one label pair, we risk missing deeper complexities. Good and evil imply the existence of the other as we saw in a recent previous section. If we think only in the dimension of coexistence, and we are only used to one dimensional analysis, then we risk omitting the consideration of full power. One where the other does not really affect in practice the execution of your desires and impulses.

Precisely because of this deeper nature too, starting to understand it from an analytical framework of thought is also less optimal. As full power does not need to be understood, it does not need to ask for permission to exist, it jut needs to be exerted. So first I wanted to lay out a display of the analytical process with the resource management dilemma, where thinking plays more of a crucial role, and does it more intuitively, which allows me to introduce the framework of thinking in a smoother, yet longer, way.

In the analysis of economics (resource management), because we start from an agreement point of view, the agreement of money usage, the pure power realm is easily and directly discarded in the analysis, because we start theorizing from a consensus, therefore not a matter of absolute power. Making it a more suitable topic so to better start familiarizing oneself with new frameworks of thinking. Like the one I’m proposing, centralized/decentralized, static/dynamic.

However, in human existence, power comes first, resource management later. Therefore I chose to present those in that order on this book. In individual matters, in the sense that the individual is the one who feels them, the matters to present where happiness and intelligence. And then I chose the social matters. As a curious fact, that is the structure that my head followed when writing all this. First displaying and understanding the pieces that build the individual, and then doing the same with the things that each individual being a pice builds, society.

I realized that this intuitive order of presentation exposes a natural dynamic. In the same way I think the individual human is first guided by happiness and then intelligence starts arising and intertwining, in the societal scope, the human is first guided by power dynamics and then resource management starts playing a role in a similar intertwined way.

Therefore, a pure analysis of just the political or jut the economical realm will be incomplete.

Curiosities aside about why I chose this order for presenting the concepts, let’s start the analysis.

Democracy can be very efficient just like libertarianism, but in power terms.

I started to see a trend, the solutions that tend to work better have these 2 traits:

1.- Decentralization via minimization of variables handled per individual with action potential.

2.- Maximization of the intelligence of the individual with action potential. Increasing its dynamism.

First, we already saw in chapter 5 why libertarianism abides number one, but does democracy abide by it?

If applied ideally, it does. At least better than the other popular alternatives like dictatorships or Oligarcracies. But anyway, if I want to get deeper into the explanation I must then clearly define what I mean by democracy.

8.2.1.- Building the definitions of the most famous power dynamics protocols.

Here are some, incomplete for now, definitions:

- Dictatorship: when there is one leader with a bunch of allies, all of them under the same group, always managing the State. No other group is allowed to aspire to manage the State (the monopoly on the use of violence).

- Oligarcracy: when there is more than one group, each with their respective leaders and interconnected internal management structures. The groups alternate between each other, every now and then, which one of them manages the State. For any other emergent group that might aspire to manage the State they need to be first approved by groups already capable of managing the State and to follow similar internal management structures to the ones the existing groups hold.

- Democracy: it is like an oligarcracy but there is no need for the existing groups’ approval to create new groups. Nor to follow similar internal management structures. The only requisite to create a new group is that any amount of 2 or more citizens, just because they are citizens, can create a group to aspire to manage the State. Each group internally managed as they want as long as the management solely depends on the effort of the members belonging to that group.

- Anarchism: There are groups, but there is no State. There is no monopoly on violence, nor violence, ideally. The groups organize with each other without the use and the fear of external violence.

Let’s start with anarchism, I already explained why I think it works worse than democracy. Because we are not intelligent enough and technologically advanced enough.

If it were possible, it would be better than democracy as the lack of needing violence clearly signals levels of abuse that are insignificant. Therefore that society would be composed of individuals who can be very happy and are very intelligent. All traits of the best natural way for societies and individuals to thrive.

Ideally, in anarchism power is not abused. But in modern reality power can lead to abuse and that is why all the previous definitions were incomplete.

As you can see, the fundamental traits that define the power dynamics protocols are who and how they are allowed to get and manage power. The greater the amount of people, or groups of people who can get and manage power, the more so called democratic the protocol is.

Originally, the name democracy come from the following. As societies are build with people and therefore the unit, the elemental source of power, is each individual in the people, in the nation, in the “demos”, that means “the people” in Greek. And “-cracy”, comes from the Greek word “kratos”, which means “power” or “rule.” The power of the people, the democracy.

The more correctly a power dynamics protocol reflects the aggregated will of the people, the more democratic is.

Thinking it with the new framework, if we want a power dynamics protocol that behaves like the people would do, by logical deduction, the only way to do so is by abiding the minimization via decentralization of variables handled per individual with action potential rule. Because only achieving greater decentralization we can achieve a behavior that better reflects the aggregated sum of people’s actions without losing too much nuances due to noisy information channels. So, democracy by the mere need derived from its definition, is the most dynamic power dynamics protocol involving a State.

We could say, in a classical way, that dictatorships are the least democratic protocol. But, as I’ve been explaining, I think that framework has limitations, and deeper truths can be unveiled with the new framework proposed.




Or, if you fancy saying the same but from the opposite perspective:



Continuing, we must realize that, as in physics, power is not always just action, it can generate or find an opposing power, a reaction.

So let’s now understand how each protocol deals with reactions in order to actually complete the definitions.

Note that reactions might lead to an abuse, but not necessarily, as agreements can occur. And by the way, here it is where most of humans hit their analytical limit. As they try to understand power from an ethical perspective, as they use the word abuse, implying a good and an evil. Even though some analysis are actually correct and very useful, they will limit the human using them by reducing the amount of people they will be able to talk to in order to reach any kind of useful conclusions over power dynamic protocols.

Anyway, even if you analyze the matter from an ethical perspective, the need for taking into account the reaction forces in the definition logically follows too. So, this being clarified, let’s go.

Completing the definitions: Democracy.

The definition of democracy should be completed with stating a complete separation, in all directions of the capabilities (powers) of the State, between its 3 different natural branches: executive (manages resources and enforces law), legislative (creates, destroys and shapes laws), judicial (judges when conflict arises as per what is dictated in law).

A complete separation in all directions means that all 3 powers are completely independent from one another, this means that they do not influence one another. That is why I chose the wording separation of directions, because forces applied in separate directions do not influence each other. There are multiple methods you can use to implement this behavior in the institutions that conform the State, they will be discussed later.

If you pay attention these 3 powers are the natural components of human action: muscle (executive power), rules for information processing and analysis (legislative power, the laws are like the neurons of a State fixing variables) and a process to solve problems when contradictory information and muscle move (judicial power, which is like the reasoning process of a brain).

But, why is separating powers essential to complete the definition of democracy? Because once one of the groups is chosen to manage and be the State, if the power of the State is not separated and controlled, then its monopoly on violence, thus unmatched power, can be used for whatever the group wants. And that whatever, for example, can be the complete change on the power dynamics protocol in use, setting other mechanics and rules, like oligarchic or dictatorial ones.

Therefore if we want to create a democratic protocol we must have a separation of powers that control each other with equal force, so there is no unmatched power that can change the rules whenever it fancies. That equal force that controls and that is given to each separated natural power can be, for example, the required support of the people of a nation. So now we would have a system that not only puts the forces pointing in different directions, but one that, if for any reason any force deviates and clashes against another, they will self-nullify or self-destroy due to having the same amount of force.

Note that, a democracy without these limits would be weak and unstable, as per mentioned, if the group managing the State wishes, could just transition to another power dynamics protocol.

Please refrain from labeling this potential dynamic arising from the incomplete definition a good or evil mechanic. As you might have noticed I have not used them nor the word abuse, which by its previous definition implies some good and some evil. That will depend on who you ask, likely the group with the power would consider this action good, others that might not agree with all its decisions will consider it evil. Just remember, at the end of the day, we can achieve deeper, more useful truths without using these labels.

Therefore now we can see, that by the very nature of the State, due to its unmatched power, we have to separate it and give each of the separations equal force if we want for our power dynamics protocol to be a democratic one that lasts.

Personally, another intuitive understanding for completing the definition of democracy is: a power dynamics protocol that results in the most delta neutral partition of the powers within the State, ideally this one being zero.

For those of you who do not know what delta neutral means. In math delta is usually used as another word for difference, it is usually written with the Greek letter delta (this one →  Δ). It just means taking the difference of 2 things, so delta neutral means that the difference is neutral, nothing, zero. This means that if we take the amount of power given to each partition of the power of a State, and we subtract them with one another, the result will be 0. Therefore, balanced.

The less neutral is the delta, the greater is the chance that, by random events of nature and society or by calculated events from groups in a society, oligarchic or dictatorial power dynamics can be set.

Just by pure force mechanics and statistical reasoning, by the pure changing will of the power holders, we need to complete the definition of a democracy with the separation of powers and the complete independence from one another.

Some will argue, and I think they are statistically right, that we need the separation and independence of powers in a democracy in order to minimize the potential yet assured abuse from the State to the people when their interests are not the same.

The argumentation goes as follows: Any uncontrolled power, given long enough time or just by existing, ends up in abusive tendencies. I consider this an interesting and very strong argumentation, because in all human history so far, this seems to be the tendency. However, in theory, a total power can chose not to abuse. Therefore I’m not a strong supporter, even though I support it and consider it a functional reasoning process, of constructing a definition and understanding of democracy from this ethical point of view. I consider it ethical because if you are considering abuse as a factor, you are implying a good and an evil. Someone harming other (evil) in the benefit of oneself (a good).

The argumentation considers that it is natural, and easier, for a living being to just abuse as long as it is not faced by an equal, or threatening enough, force. In similar words, as seen, a being can abuse as long as it can control the chaos arising from its abuse.

Again, all are likelihoods, there is a chance that an unmatched power remains non-abusive for a long time. Yet that is not the tendency as per human history so far, thus we should not act every day as if it was, because then, per sheer statistics of nature, we would be wrong most of the time. This is mainly why I support this flow of thoughts even if I do not consider it the pure foundation that should be used to define democracy.

Personally I think this tendency stems from the complexity of our societies, as per the amount of individuals, and the subjective nature of happiness. We have so many people and so many desires that makes us happy that to coordinate them all using non-conflicting forces is impossible for our current degree of intelligence. Therefore, abstracting our thoughts from this to reach deeper truths is very hard.

On top of that, though at more fundamental levels which I do agree as fundamental, the argumentation follows with that creating chaos, disorder, is literally more physically easy, it requires less effort. I agree until here. The, the argumentation says that as long as a living being can still live in the chaos, it will do so, by inertia. Unless faced with another force bearer being, a competitor, that makes the first being not able to successfully exists with the chaos to satisfy its needs. The way I disagree with this is that I consider it incomplete, I do think living beings might just not stay in the chaos by inertia. What distinguishes living beings from inert ones is that we “machines” with ordering capabilities.

Even with this debate apart, what I will explain still holds. So, then, because of these natural tendencies, even if somehow we start with democratic traits of power access and management as the ones defined on the previous incomplete definition, if a society just incorporates them to its power dynamics and nothing more, the power will tend to be every time reduced in smaller and smaller amounts of groups with greater and greater amounts of power. Because whichever group controls the State, which is an absolute power, if it controls all its parts, at some point, it will fall into the natural tendency of making it easier for them to follow its own interest and goals.

And, making it easier for them means that it will eventually require altering the power dynamics protocol so it is easier for the groups controlling the State to keep it, resulting in the application of similar dynamics described in the oligarcracy or even in the dictatorship incomplete definitions.

So we have seen that to actually define and therefore create a democracy we must take into account the actions and reactions mechanics and constrain then in such a way that they do not break other parts of the definition.

You can reach this conclusion, as seen, via just thinking about pure power and forces or via thinking about ethical interests and forces.

Completing the definitions: Dictatorship.

Now let’s go to dictatorship. How does it handle the potential reactions and how should we define this management in order to keep the definition consistent?

At a State level, dictatorships, by an ideal definition do not have this problem. As they do not allow any competitor and they have the all mighty power of the State.

However if we step away from the definition and ideas realm, in reality they likely have competitors that have to be silenced.

As, as seen with the limited variables that can be handled per human, similar to the critique to communism, a reduced group of people can not accurately rule and govern with the same interests as every single human on a big society they rule for, or rule over.

Thus we encounter a clash and potential for abuse. Now, if the protocol for power dynamics must be a dictatorship, then we can include in its realistic and complete definition the use of methods to neutralize any potentially strong enough opposing power. These methods can be imprisonment, censorship, public executions, silent murdering, the modern social media defamation campaign, economical bribery to corrupt initially real opposition... among others.

The ruling group (elite) will tend to chose the silencing act who creates the more manageable chaos according to the intelligence of the ruling group compared to the abused and repressed group. The more intelligent and strong they are compared to the abused being, usually the people, the more severe and chaos tending the abuses they can make, like public executions. Elites, by mere definition, are way smaller in number compared to the people, so in practice the abuse amount and methods’ severity are proportional to the difference in intelligences of the elite with the people. The greater the difference in intelligences, the more severe the abuses.

Completing the definitions: Oligarcracy.

Let’s now complete the definition of oligarcracy.

oligarcracies, ideally, do not really mind about reactions either. As the groups that form them are the only ones who allow or not the creation of other groups. They, by definition, can’t just abuse in any way desired as dictators do, yet they just have to follow some rules based on a consensus agreed with their elite peers. And, if any other group tries to emerge, they will directly or indirectly force him to follow those rules and fall in the elite’s consensus.

As you might have noticed, for the very same reasons, the completion of the definition is the same as in the dictatorship. Due to the impossibility of making the whole society have the same interests as the ruling elites, they will have to neutralize the ones who differ. Usually, due to existing multiple groups that require consensus, the neutralization process is less direct, or more sophisticated than in dictatorships. Because the groups have to agree, reach a consensus, the methods for reactions’ neutralizations must be more complex as they must align with the intelligences and power of each distinct group in the elite.

A way in which oligarchies neutralize opposing and revolutionary groups is to assure that if they emerge, then they try to corrupt them via economics and making them become non-revolutionary groups by linking their economic funding to public funds, a.k.a. tax payer money collected and controlled by the all-mighty power of the State.

Then, leveraging that any human organization at large scales functions as an oligarchy, as Robert Michels observed last century, they jut need to bribe the leader or the little most influential people inside the new revolutionary movement and hope for them to be able to fool their followers into submission. It work pretty well. But, if for any reason the follower are not fooled, well then it does not work and other methods will have to be used.

The money they used does not really need to just be tax payer money, it can also be money mainly controlled and/or greatly influence by the already existing groups that can aspire to control the State, the elites. This is what I meant by interconnected internal management structures at the initial definitions. In this case, I’m explaining an example of economical interconnected structure.

And, as the last nuance, they do not really need to bribe the key revolutionaries with money, they can also threat with violence at the mafia style, social defamation, or any other silencing technique already mentioned in the dictatorship part.

This way, leaders of opposing groups that act by reaction can be bought and slowly the leaders themselves silence or trick their followers into eventually making less or even no opposing force.

Completing the definitions: Finale.

And finally let’s complete the definitions of oligarcracies and dictatorships stating that in them, there can not be a complete separation of powers. In dictatorships none at all, and in Oligarcracies there might be some, but not complete.

This is because the powers of the State can not be fully or even slightly separated. Because if so the degree of freedom that that separation of power brings can lead to emerging groups that can not be controlled by the existing one/s.

Thus democracy is not only defined by the people’s capability to create groups with a high degree of freedom, but also from the fact that it tries, by definition and its assured survival, to reduce to a minimal any abuse of power.

Because in a system where people can freely create groups, but once one group is elected has all power, it is just really energetically easy to eventually centralize group creation mechanics and lead to an oligarcracy or tyranny (dictatorship) as we saw.

This is actually one of the core reasons why some nations allow gun ownership to their citizens, so to counterbalance this natural risk of powerful entities, like a State, to slowly centralize in faulty systems and start being abusive without control. There are other methods not involving guns, like educating people and designing your institutions accurately, we will talk about them later. As someone born in a non-guns country, I found the argumentation interesting, I will leave it here for all those who have been born in places like mine.

Anyway, more curious thoughts apart, here I leave the final definitions:

- Dictatorship: when there is one leader with a bunch of allies, all of them under the same group, always managing the State. No other group is allowed to aspire to manage the State (the monopoly on the use of violence).

- Oligarcracy: when there is more than one group, each with their respective leaders and interconnected internal management structures. The groups alternate between each other, every now and then, sometimes even the people vote it in elections, on which one of them manages the State. For any other emergent group that might aspire to manage the State they need to be first approved by groups already capable of managing the State and to follow similar internal management structures to the ones the existing groups hold.

- Democracy: it is like an oligarcracy but there is no need for the existing groups’ approval to create new groups. Nor to follow similar internal management structures. The only requisite to create a new group is that any group, 2 citizens or more, just because they are citizens, can create a group to aspire to manage the State. Each group internally managed as they want as long as the management only depends on the effort of the members of that group.

- Anarchism: There are groups, but there is no State. There is no monopoly on violence, nor violence, ideally. The groups organize with each other without the use and the fear of external violence.

Note that I did not bother yet in completing or making more nuanced my understanding of anarchism. This is a practical choice, my time and brain power is limited and I prefer to focus on other protocols that actually exist today and so far make doable sense to my thinking process. As I grow and I learn and think more details about everything, including anarchism, I will keep refining the book with them as I always do.

For example, I’m currently reading Robert Michels’ study on the oligarchic tendencies of democratic groups. To be honest, I think, for now, due to cognitive limits, even democratic systems eventually land in the alternation in power of 2 or little more main parties (groups). Maybe this is linked to the good and evil, yes or no, mindset we currently use. Maybe, if we adopt the 2 dimensional approach, in democratic nations, there will be 4 main parties.

Anyway, this does not affect democracy, as it does not mean that there will be lot of option to chose from, it just means that, if there is a need for a new option or to replace an existing one, it can be done with ease by the people.

8.2.2.- Why democracy, for now.

Now that we know the definitions under I which construct this book. Let me explain why I think we should aim for democracy.

8.2.2.1.- Why not-s.

Why not dictatorships?

I will start explaining it by tackling why I do not prefer dictatorships.

They are worse as they lack dynamism thus it is less adaptive, which makes satisfying human needs harder in ever changing environments, specially in ones who do it quickly.

Furthermore, dictatorships tend to be very centralized by nature, thus there is a high chance they are handled too many variables to manage. Just as in my critique to communism in the economics part. This lack of enough intelligence to handle so many variables likely leads to inefficient actions, as abusive behavior, which is not good for the majority by definition, as the dictating group is a minority. Yeah, zero abuse is always impossible, yet we must minimize the chances of it, not increase them.

I do not mean dictatorships can not work. Dictators can still make good decisions. And if they do it consistently, they will likely face no power tackling back against them.

As I always say it depends on the analytical context. Yet, in bigger contexts, those of long-term tendency terms, dictatorships are more static and more centralized, precisely the traits that obstruct intelligent individuals to flow freely and solve problems while and for adapting to future challenges.

Hence, the chances of a dictatorship adapting are lower, they are not the rule, they are in tendencies terms, the exception. And we should not aim to behave like we live in a continuous exception, because then we will be statistically wrong most of the time.

Why not oligarcracies?

The critique to oligarcracy is basically the same. Yet, as oligarcracies have a greater number of groups with a slightly greater variety, it has a more dynamic nature and it is less centralized.

Because of this, it will statistically function better than a dictatorship. Still, it is not as decentralized and as dynamic as a democracy.

However, as oligarcracies are a more sophisticated and complex system, you can craft more complex and sophisticated arguments on why they should exists. We will explore them now. Like the ideas behind plutocracies and technocracies.

But, all of them can not escape the truth of its more static and centralized nature, qualities that, as explained all along and repeating myself, obstruct intelligent individuals to flow freely and solve problems while and for adapting to future challenges.

They will, for some time, escape that truth yet they can not escape it forever. This deeper static and centralized nature, by the natural forces of human existence, will at some point stop being enough, and both dictatorships and oligarcracies will have to be, as software engineers say, deprecated.

Even though human nature is hierarchical and an authority is needed, as human societies change with its natural cycle: people are born, die and teach each other along the way. As that process executes, if humans do not get extinguished and we find ways of successfully storing the information taught, which we seem to be good at, the complexity of our societies will grow.

We can not escape forever the ever growing complexity of wisdom, which eventually requires decentralization and dynamism to arrange.

This is the fundamental argument that make these protocols eventually not functional. Which is, in practice, a gamble which its odds get worse the more time it passes. As you can not measure, you can not predict, if you can not predict, your ability to solve problems and adapt decreases over time.

This fundamental cycle of our existence brings the end of centralized and static protocols, slowly testing them out, creating friction, with each new generation of humans. New beings, with slightly or completely different characteristics and birth-environments will be born which will lead to lots of completely or slightly different desires that will need to be arranged all over again.

The complexity of the task does not end there. These new beings, because of another human trait, the one of teaching the new generations old lessons, will likely inherit greater, more complex wisdom, for example, technological progress related knowledge. A higher starting point of complexity in their intellectual journey, which, will unavoidably create friction with the simpler social structures and norms created for the lower complexity starting points of the previous generations.

The friction will and must be resolved, and societies with power dynamics protocols that are more centralized and static, will create more pressure and explosions, in the shape of societal violence, stress, visible or silent misery generally speaking, when exposed to this unavoidable friction.

Newer technologies, more complex wisdom reflected in a deeper understanding of the universe, which usually allows for more of us to exist taking usage of our natural resources, which makes no other thing but to make the system even more complex, putting even more burden on top of these simpler more centralized and static systems.

Overall, as long as we keep fucking, preserving and teaching knowledge, our societies will do no other thing but to increase in complexity. And there will be a point where these more centralized and static protocols will just not be enough.

Therefore, if we want to last in time, we must transition to democracy, and in a very far away future, if we figure it out, to anarchism-look-alike protocols.

If we do not do it, then conflicts, also by the very same nature of humans, will arise. And these conflicts, technical or social, in the same way that society is now more complex, they will be more complex to solve too. Whenever that happens, there is chance, which ultimately will be a reality, that the old ologarcracies and dictatorships won’t be able to solve them.

Due to too much variable, I’m unable to predict if we are already close to that point in time. That point in time will come, however, I just do not know when. What I know is that the amount of wars in the last decades keeps being relatively the same and in the same old geographical areas. This might be signaling the limits of minimizing abuse given our current political and economical solutions.

New revolutionary technologies are being developed: CDNs, AI, and zero-knowledge cryptography which will allow for the creation of more efficient solutions. Wether centralized and static ones or dynamic and decentralized ones. I bet that, due to the increase flow of information and new trust dynamics these technologies create, they will be the key to actually make all nations step towards the next decentralization step.

The next step, without more war and extreme conflict, look like:

- Most oligarcracies will become democracies.

- Actual democracies will refine their checks-and-balances that keep the system going.

- Hard dictatorships, those that nowadays there are not even elections and are isolated from the world will transition to oligarchracies for a generation.

- Soft dictatorships will transition to a small period of half a human generation of oligarcracies. With soft dictatorships I refer to these countries which nowadays refer to themselves as democracies just because their population can vote but the same figure or party stays in power for decades and because all new candidates suddenly die, disappear or are bribed into retiring.

I predict this timeline because, thanks to the new technologies, we can learn faster and communicate better the way forward. Taking less time that the previous decentralization steps took.

However, if we do not follow this path, who knows, maybe one of the conflicts is the so famous and always around the corner World War III that extinguishes our species. That, if anything, will signal the dumbness of our species, we, human beings, with whatever biological mechanisms we had, were not able to go further.

Concluding with the argumentation against more centralized and static systems: Even though more centralized and static protocols might be the temporary solution that works now and worked in the past, sooner or later, they will stop working. As the inherited wisdom makes complexity grow. This is the ever growing complexity of wisdom curse, or blessing, humans face.

In any way, and in favor of Cheerfulism, as we have seen previously, the maximization of intelligence with a focus on happiness optimization creates several dynamics already explained in section 5.4.2 so to be optimistic regarding the the minimization of abuse, which leads to less conflict, less chaos, more predictability. Makings survival and happiness easier to execute even if we remain in dictatorships or oligarcracies.

Why not democracies?  On the gun-to-monkey weakness.

Don’t be a fool either, even if I have democratic tendencies, I acknowledge its imperfections. Don’t forget point 2 from the essential traits that protocols which work best follow:

2.- Maximization of the intelligence of the individual with action potential. Increasing its dynamism.

Decentralization and dynamism are really cool and work marvelously, yet only if given to intelligent individuals. One because only intelligent individuals can process as much variables, and second, which derives from one, because the creation and maintenance of such systems is a highly complex task on itself, requiring for its successful completion the achievement of such degree of intelligence.

A short Youtube video I love, where a guy named Osho (also known as Rajneesh), an Indian philosopher as per what the AI told me, once said:

“Democracy basically means government by the people, of the people, for the people... but the people are retarded.”

Here is a Youtube link in case you are reading this in an era where Youtube exists: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QFgcqB8-AxE.

This emblematic quote summarizes really well the main “danger” of democracy, but, deep down, it actually summarizes the danger I’ve named right above of decentralizing and making more dynamic systems with less intelligent and dumber people.

As mentioned, these logically better systems are more complex, going no further than democracy, designing a properly functioning democratic constitution is a far more complex task than the one, if it even exits, of a dictatorship. Dictatorships do not have to deeply bother with game theory, incentives design, checks and balances, unambiguous wording etc They jut have to bother about effective organization of the State and silencing potential uprising revolts. But, as it has all the power of the State, the second to-do is not that hard. Anyway, the task of organizing a State in itself is a difficult one that a body which is centralized and static will eventually mess up as we have previously analyzed.

The danger of democracy can also be simply understood with this other popular phrase: This is like giving a gun to a monkey.

Plutocracy or technocracy, mentioned earlier, which are jut a type of oligarcracy, based their whole existence on this premise. In case you do not know, plutocracy defends the right of the wealthiest groups to control power. And technocracy defends the right of the technocrats elite to control power. Technocrats are those who know how technology works and make it progress. Curiously enough, in a system that rewards efficiency above most of things, technocrats usually end up being among the richest and both types of olgarcraciess mix, leading to a sort of plutotecnocracy.

Libertarianism, as you might have noticed, has the same “gun-to-monkey” weakness. But in the realm of economics.

As I said with socialism in resource management: Oligarcracies, or even dictatorships might be needed, but we should not be proud of them, one because they signal the untamed presence of abusive traits which promote chaos, and second because that chaos, arising from abuse and from the ever growing complexity of human wisdom, leads to limits and friction in our thriving capabilities as a species. For these two fundamental reasons we should aim and strive for systems as much decentralized and dynamic as possible, such as democracy and libertarianism, both understood under the definitions of this book, remember. 

As a currently controversial take, nations that fall under dictatorial or oligarchic regimes do so, in part, because of their and their neighbors’ lack of greater intelligence. Wether of politicians or citizens’ intelligence. Same applies for nations who opt for economical socialism or the lack of anarchism. These protocols are just a sign of not intelligent enough individuals, or at least, not intelligent enough yet. And here is where hope resides.

I do not think this lack of intelligence is mainly lead by dumbness or psychopaths, but mainly by improvable traits such as ignorance and laziness.

Wether economically or politically, I prefer protocols who better follow both of the 2 points mentioned. Because they better allow people to be the best version of themselves. They allow people to better leverage the natural biological mechanisms that have kept them alive and thriving for thousands of years in a more efficient, adaptive way.

And, if you allow me to intertwine sections, the only way to make dictatorships or oligarcracies sustainable would be by limiting human intelligence via limiting its natural exploration instinct. This seems impossible, every time you go against nature, at some point it explodes in your face in some way.

For example, drinking alcohol to keep you awake for the party and then the next day you can’t do much. For example, drinking coffee to work longer for a few days, you will end up with poor resting ability and higher levels of anxiety. For example, fighting a lion, you lose, and die.

Another way to delay the deadline of the unavoidable change, not to stop it, would be to keeping the population amount the same, or even reducing it. However, as long as knowledge is inherited, stored, and we do now self annihilate in a nuclear war, this will just be a slow down, as the natural human instinct of exploration will lead to the unavoidable ever growing complexity of wisdom.

Trying to sustain centralized and static power dynamics follows the same natural principle of something exploding in your face at some point. It is just that, due to the complexity of the situation, you need a certain combination of factors to align, which does not always happen, in order for the thing to explode in your face. But at some point, it will, by the natural forces already mentioned. And when that happens, the consequences can be as the ones described: from a hangover, to death, and extinction.

Even if we unrealistically assume that you manage to fully control the instinct to explore that all humans awaken and to keep population sizes equal, then your society will likely last less than if it was a more decentralized and dynamic one, because you will simply have a greater likelihood for this perfect storm of factors against you to appear.

8.2.2.2.- Why yes-es. More guns and more monkeys.

Often, lasting change comes from conviction and undeniable arguments in favor rather than reaction and arguments against “the alternative”. So let’s understand the conviction side of the matter.

Why oligarcracies or even dictatorships?

As said earlier, with oligarchies we can logically craft a complex scenario where a technocrat, because he is very intelligent, has control over some people and takes better decisions than the people he is controlling would take democratically.

We can say that it is safe to assume a technocrat as a very intelligent being due to having the capability of handling and developing technology, tools that solve problems, very complex ones usually.

In a very Cheerful way, a technocrat can say, as of X society, if we measure everyone’s intelligence we can actually see that we would operate better, in short or long term, if I rule. And he might be right.

Unfortunately, we can not measure this due to how complex and dynamic our society is and due to our limited measuring technologies. But the scenario showcased above is not illogical and it is plausible.

Dictatorships can also be argued in favor of via using a similar logic. For example, it can go as follows:

Some dictatorships might come from a period of a long civil war, under which a victorious side became a dictatorial regime. In this case, it can even be logically argued as this being good, in the sense of the lesser evil. Because under the fuzziness and chaos of a long lasting civil war, it can be deemed impossible to clearly convince everyone of who is the “bad one who deserves to lose”, therefore, before the impossibility of a rational end amidst chaos, the end of the chaos and beginning of any order is better than none.

And after the finalization of the war, it could be stated that the society was too fragmented internally to even function, and a firm tight grip is actually giving better results. And they might even be right in their claim, yet again, due to the complexity of modern human societies and the chaos of societies in conflict, we can not empirically confirm it by measuring with certainty all variables involved.

Our best approximation would be a historical analysis, which, obviously, is pure speculation based on texts which who know who actually wrote them and under which intentions and conditions. That is just not accurate enough for a convincing resolution that must coordinate all of people as in our current world.

From this we can see that the arguments in favor of less decentralized and dynamic protocols are based on logically correct but empirically impossible to verify claims.

Don’t be a fool either, arguments in favor of decentralized and dynamic protocols are the same. Yet, as I think they are the solution, I’m to lazy to focus on crafting them, but you can figure them out easily with similar reasons to the long ago mentioned one of someone who becomes drug addict when given freedom analysis. Something on the lines of:

How do you know, with empirical certainty, that, given freedom to someone, it will not use it to purposefully abuse others generating too much chaos or it will not just fall into some addiction?

Therefore they are, in practice, founded over a what-if belief applied on a single time-frame of a society. This analytical framework falls into the realm of what is usually known as social-sciences.

As we can not rigorously measure their origin and therefore conclude if they are needed we can though observe reality as is now and conclude, by deduction, that if our analysis of human nature is right, the fact that we are not yet, and we were not in the past, a species intelligent enough to form any other more decentralized and dynamic protocol that the ones we eventually had.

Furthermore, if you take this valid logical deduction and observe the current world you see a lack of democracies everywhere, in fact most of societies are oligarcracies. Therefore you can even conclude reasonably that we nowadays do need oligarcracies.

There will be endless arguments of the winners and losers of recent history, on, this happened because you did this thing at this specific time, others will say, that is a lie!, others will say, no, this other factor had more influence etc Some will say, you could have avoided this!, the one who could have avoided this will say, there was no choice because of this, this and that! Some will think they could have done it better if they would have been given a chance etc etc

All of them, and the humans that will listen to them, will remain though in their two-dimensional natural human analysis of good and evil.

In a scenario with so may possibilities our imagination can think of but none can be empirically verified by most of us. Reinforcing the need for ideologies and for groups of: I believe this is what it happened.

In some conflicts, the people who were actually there and know the truth, if the majority ends up believing a lie, will feel resentment or hopelessness, the people who thought there was an alternative will feel betrayed or hopeless again, the people who lost believing they are right will feel revengeful or… you guessed it hopeless.

And so on and so forth, without no one every truly knowing with certainty if the winners did all they could, and even without knowing, if the winners had the capability to do what they seemed to be able to do. The further in time the conflict lies, and the more complex it was, the harder it will be for making everyone agree on what actually happened, what could have been done, and what should have been done.

Whatever all those variables were, because of our incapability or reconstructing the sequence of events hat lead to the end result, we might reasonably conclude in a belief, a belief of, overall, we did needed that end and there was “no other choice” than that. Specially if that end result happened lots of times at historically close times all over the world. Like the formation of oligarcracies in the last century.

This is a fair argument, which leads to the conclusion I mentioned before of: we are not intelligent enough.

Yet, this argument can be broken. For that we must not be blinded by the past we will never see with certainty, we must find a solution based on a future we can walk towards with consistency.

Said in a less philosophical, less poetical way. We can break that argument with the old and always appearing human nature of exploration: One thing is who you are and what build and conditioned you in the past, and another completely different thing is who you can become. The impulse to explore, intellectually and physically, for the pursuit of a better life without the errors of the pats will always be a thing.

Do you really think humans are made to accept their current limitations and say for log periods of time: Yeah, we must be satisfied with oligarcracies ? They will be for some time, don’t be a fool, but the ever growing complexity of wisdom arisen from the vital need for exploration will eventually destroy you if you resist.

And here, the only way I can think of someone still being in favor of oligarcracies goes with the following argumentation. By the way, I won’t bother in arguing in favor of plutocracy as is obvious that money does not correlate with intelligence, the trait needed for optimal societal coordination. Anyway, the argument goes as follows:

Developing technology correlates with intelligence so, Charles, what you are mentioning here is the ideal case, but in practice it is clearly seen and known that the people in the masses are, on average, less intelligent than the all mighty engineers.

So, to some extent, in a society which is unavoidably hierarchical like human ones, isn’t it better to maximize the intelligence of the people in “higher” positions of the organizational ladder and hence put technocrats there? Therefore, shouldn’t we aim for a technocracy? An oligarcracy of technocrats where anyone can opt to gain power as long as it is a proven intelligent technocrat?

Even if I accept your argument of the ever growing complexity of wisdom, shouldn’t we walk towards there on technocratic steps?

The base idea is that a technocrat is more fit than any other person to rule, to organize the political institutions. Because he knows how to solve complex problems.

Well, the first argument that demolishes this idea is the following: That is just not enough, a problem as complex as societal coordination at scale, by the very same complexity and by the very same definition of the problem, requires managing lots of people. Technocrats might not be good at that. As solving complex technological problems does not always involve managing lots of people. For example a software engineer that can understand and write a complex code without talking to anyone else.

The counter argument in order to keep supporting technocracy would be: But wait, what about technocrat CEOs (the big boss) that worked on large companies? They not only are proven to be intelligent but also “good enough” at managing people while satisfying desires for a larger group.

The counter argument to the counter argument follows as:

Well, that is true as long as this technocrat was a boss or organizer on its previous position and it was working in a highly competitive market. Technocrats coming from monopolistic or oligopolistic markets are not fit. The ones coming from competitive markets know how to minimize abuse to their workers, because either they are empathetic or they must do it enforced by the market. If you abuse to much, workers have the possibility of leaving to the competing business. At the same time this profile of person also knows how to solve a complex technical problem, this one being creating a product the market demands.

If the market was not competitive we end up in a situation where a very intelligent and powerful individual can trick others into being abused without them realizing, worker exploitation. Which, in the political realm, the analogous phenomena he would produce is corruption. And as we saw, corruption is an abusive act, which we have to minimize in order to have societies that coordinate better, without too much chaos, unpredictability.

Argument: But okay, you said it yourself, let’s then create a technocracy where the leaders are the individuals with those specific traits: Boss of a large company in a competitive market.

Counter arguments:

1) How many of those people do exist in the world? These are juts very few people and we are just too many.

Furthermore, even assuming there are now currently enough. What about where they live? What about the future? Creating the oligarchic requirement for aspiring to control power of “only if you are this type of technocrat” creates also other physical problems.

Even if it was true that the profile of a technical ex-CEO of a large business in a competitive market is the best institution’s manager, that does not guarantee there will be one of them for every region or terrain a society lives in. Relying on its existence for the system to work is an unnecessary risk and we must not forbid anyone for reaching a political position because of that.

A dynamic system where we encourage paying more attention to the described figures as potential leaders might just work better than enforcing their participation creating a risk of shortages.

A democratic mechanism is just more adaptive and we should aim for it. A techno-democracy I might argue, where it works as a democracy but at a cultural level people tend to pay more attention to the described figures as potential leaders.

Still, even if this is culturally technocratic, we are talking about democratic rules of the game now.

2) Furthermore, even if there were enough, they have already chosen to not be politicians. How would we convert them? Will they change their minds and be more exposed as a figure of a public institution?

3) And most fundamentally: What incentives will there exist to assure the minimization of abuse once they are in power? Quick market dynamics providing feedback loops of information on what is wrong do no exist here, we are in the power realm now.

These people might just had been nice to employers due to the competitive market they were in, and as seen, power knows no to little competitors in other protocols other than democracy.

So nothing systematically assures you that an abuse minimization will be found if someone reaches power. We would eventually be relying on a small group of people’s desires which can easily go against the people they would be ruling, in this case, ruling over, not ruling for. And, this tends to chaos and more unpredictability over time due to the every growing complexity of wisdom.

The feedback loop of information processing in a democracy enables a more dynamic existence better aligned with human intrinsic behavior, the one who has made us survive so far.

A feedback loop of a democracy is the one which is as dynamic as possible given the unavoidable conditions of societal coordination at scale, in this case the organization of power dynamics, which mimics and re-creates the economical reason on why competition matters and makes products better, but in the realm of power.

It is true that in an oligarcracy there can still be elections, but these are limited to the voices vetted directly or more indirectly, by the oligarchs. Which reduces the amount of information you can extract from the feedback loops, as some real but ignored groups would be left out, making it less useful and therefore worsening the prediction capabilities or problem solving capabilities of the ruling group. Due to this core undeniable structural inefficiency on the feedback loop structure that oligarcracies have, democracy is just better for human well-being. Harder to properly implement, but if achieved, better.

Just like market dynamics in perfect competition but in the realm of power. In perfect competition, anyone who knows how to make a better product can access the mean to create it and, from the worker side, can freely move to work to competing businesses if they are being abused. In perfect competition of power, everyone who has a vision for its society can create a group to reflect it and show it to its neighbors. And if their neighbors are not satisfied with the current one or think the new one is better, they can just move towards it, faster or slower, but towards it.

The only thing that makes us solve problems are feedback loops, fix a variable and unfix it, an action with an associated reaction that carries error correcting information with it (learning), and in democracy, that feedback loops is just richer thanks to the possibility of more diverse reactions that allow us to better understand reality and then react accordingly as per our goals and interests.

The core natural principle in favor on richer feedback loop has already been presented long ago. In section 4.1.4.- What we now know, what we did, and the way forward to optimize power dynamics.

There we realized the unavoidable reality of large enough human societies where people start demanding simplified truths for complex problems due to biological cognitive limits mixed with the laziness in intelligence maximization. Which leads to the known phenomena of demagogy.

Concluding that chapter, the following sentences appeared:

“The goal for advancing our civilization is to change the rules of the game for power so they don’t depend that much on simplified truths.

All this follows logically from our intrinsic adaptation technique of the fixed variable resolution technique which is leveraged as seen in power dynamics. Mastering the understanding and use of it by improving the information management flow will generate the least friction possible in our coexistence.”

That argumentation still holds even more true today, as of when I’m writing this. I’m even more convinced of it after reading Robert Michels and realizing that, even in industrial times, societies still had the issue of the “stupid mass that can not comprehend”. However, in times where information accessing friction has been dramatically decreased, we have not yet found an improvement of the stupid mas. Signaling either that this effect will actually exist but takes one or two more generations to consolidate, or, signaling that there is something more fundamental in humans or our societal structures which makes the mass remain stupid.

It practice I think both are true, most of people don’t take as a core philosophy and goal for life the maximization of intelligence, and educational systems, as an example of pivotal societal structure, are made for the old times needs of learning capabilities. However, as we slowly or more quickly manage to get rid of this, I do think that the rules of the game for power and the technical application of them will depend way less of simplified truths.

In that section we saw how simplified truths will likely not lead us to correct solutions, specially in the modern world. Because they are ultimately guided by emotions, a biological tool coded for our tribal times, not the modern ones. A tool that will likely fail, one because the scenario now is more complex, and second because it is new and the solution, therefore, will also require some degree of novelty.

Not only this but as mentioned there too, simplified truths help nothing when controlling chaos:

“Artificial rivals deduced from a real intellectual effort to describe a problem, which might be true and real, but both of its simplified derived dichotomies are wrong to some extent as they have been created through a simplification of reality. And when simplifying you always miss little details that in complex systems tend to be crucial when trying to minimize chaos.

(...)

All these dichotomies, for learning purposes are not bad, but, for solving real life complex systems, they are. Those little details are as important as the whole. A small perturbation in the complex systems we live in can cause unpredicted, and probably undesired, consequences. Just like butterfly effects.”

Therefore, to shape a prosperous society in which we can figure out our best future possible and walk towards it, we should rely on as little simplified truths as possible.

Democracy, as per its richer feedback loop mechanism, allows the greatest minds to use their thinking more often and in more effective ways. The minds that apply the critical thinking and diminish the simplified truths phenomena.

Whereas in more centralized and static protocols, these minds are likely silenced and can not efficiently execute the act of critical thinking. Increasing the amount of simplified truths with all the known risks we have observed from them, like poorer feedback loops.

But, and big but, all this is true as long as your entity is capable of processing the information without overheating.

As said on the economics part, sometimes we do need this simpler models to exist because we can not manage to create nor understand collectively the functioning of more complex ones. But that should not make us ignore or deny the superiority of the more complex ones. We must acknowledge our starting point, think like an engineer, figure out improvements, and work towards them.

I can only keep thinking of more staticness-risks that a technocracy brings with it. So, again, even if it is realistic and logical for certain kinds of technocrats to perform better, we should not just systematically await for them to appear in a big enough amount and after that, to wait and pray so their desires are aligned with ours, for the functioning of our societies. We should aim for the system on its own to reflect the trends of a functioning thriving and lasting society. So in practice we do not improve at the pace of exceptions, but at the pace of us just existing, regardless of exceptions and even benefiting more from them when they occur, as they will have a voice so everyone takes them into account.

We can keep cycling the argumentation in favor of oligarcracies by recycling on and on with different wording the “gun-to-monkey” principle:

Argument: But opening the gate to non-technocrats creates the risk of someone really bad at managing getting the role.

Counter-argument: That is true, but you will never delete that. Freedom is the ability to explore, and exploring brings risk with it, always. The only way to make sure the negative side of the risk does not appear or it appears as less as possible is with responsibility. The ability to recognize the failure points and taking charge of them.

And democratic systems, as they align representatives with represented, create responsibility. Minimizing always this risk.

Furthermore, because they have a richer feedback loop than oligarcracies, the information and detection of this risk is improved. Assuming the individuals represented are intelligent enough to handle it. Which is a logical assumption in a society that is successfully managing a complex democratic protocol.

Yet only technocracies, do not minimize any inherent risk, in fact they have the inherent risk of not existing enough profile-matching-technocrats. They are systematically more fragile while democracy is systematically designed to be risk minimized. And I’m not even mentioning the annihilating argument which I’m tired of mentioning already: the every growing complexity of human wisdom.

Facing the risk of a bad leader through revocable representation of anyone is more effective than facing the risks of gate-closing the system to a select few.

Furthermore, thanks to this, democracy also opens the door for other types of specialist to appear, those specialized on the management of their region. And these masters can learn from the technocrats, while at the same time the technocrats can just mind their own business, literally, ruling their own business way better.

This is the already known benefit that the idea of specialization in the production process brings. Technocracies give technocrats the responsibility of also managing and having to worry about power and the nuances of regions, giving way more variables to them and increasing the likelihood of poor performance or failure.

Democracy is better because these power and region specific specialists can be created with the temporary technocrat help with organizational techniques teaching and then each one follows its own path more efficiently. The principle of revocability allows the technocrats to delegate to the masses that role. Now it is up to the masses to do it right.

If a technocrat does not support it then it just means that he does not trust the masses. Like not giving an employee a role because you don’t trust it will do it right. The “gun-to-monkey” principle.

But again, if the masses show a clear understanding of democracy and how to implement and manage it, then democracy is superior too due to this separation of concerns mechanic that it enables. And due to all the so many times mentioned other benefits of dynamism and decentralization for human problem solving.

We could be going, on and on, thinking about arguments and counter arguments, crafting specific examples of scenarios where democracy is superior, and where certain kinds of oligarcracies are superior too. As we saw at the very beginning, everything is just statistics, and almost anything is theoretically possible to happen at some point in time.

As you might have seen, the only way to attack democracy is by destroying one of its pillars, what if people vote something that was actually wrong, like not being able to discern a valid leader/organizer? But the same critique can be made to oligarchic systems with voting. And here we go again, what if we give a gun to a monkey? What if we bite more than we can chew?

Quite an useless critique because we are ultimately saying: what if X is capable of Y but X happens not to be capable of Y in a percentage of the time, and that time arrives? Theoretically logical critique, yet useless for any informed action. As it carries no information because it is always true for any X and Y.

Human existence is way bigger than politics or economics, if we aim to systematically improve it, we must aim to understand all vital sections of it, and education and intelligence are a crucial part too.

Do we need oligarchies as per the current state of the world? Seems like it. Should we accept this and that is it?  Clearly not, we are made to keep refining our systems or as we have seen, a perfect storm will come and we will become extinguished. The next step is clear, democracy… Or is it? More on the following sections.

To start wrapping this up, supporting a technocracy, after all these arguments, can only be done by follows similar reasons on wether to make drug consumption illegal or to just educate and make people very aware of its bad consequences.

Everyone knows the second way makes sense, but still some oppose it because they do not trust themselves or their neighbors’ capability of executing it. Again, and for the last time, the gun-to-monkey principle.

Everyone knows democracy makes more sense than technocracy but the ones who defend technocracy do not trust themselves or others into properly creating and handling a democracy. At a national level, given education and deep thought, not choosing democracy is fundamentally based on trust issues.

These are solved by education, learning, defeating intellectual laziness, listening and communicating calmly to foster trust.

At international levels, due to the absence of a Wolrd Government, in scenarios of crisis, not having a democracy might arise too from a stronger foreign nation influencing yours in such a chaotic way that create those trust issues in order to better control you as more centralized and static systems are better to control. But not because your society is not ready for a democracy, but because it is being abused by another, or other, nations, consciously or unconsciously at both parts of the abusive pair.

Again, the other nation that would be abusing yours might be doing it, a analyzed, by 2 reasons, lack of intelligence of figuring out better ways of interacting with you, or, thinking it is capable of controlling you without generating too much chaos it can not control.
Regardless of the motivations for the abuse, at some point, if you want your society to be more decentralized and dynamic the solution of education, learning etc etc will be required. Once that is done, there are multiple ways to handle the relation with the abusive nation or nations, but that will be discussed in a later section.
Concluding, even if today we need oligarcracies because we can not manage to peacefully transition to democracies, I aim for democracy. Because it is in the human nature to learn, teach, explore and keep refining the processes that make this life more enjoyable.

X.- Conclusion 8.2.1

For all these reasons explained through the 8.2.2 sections, I aim for democracy, for now. Notice I did not say choose, I said aim for. It depends on the context.

In our current context, I do not think democracies are possible, but, precisely because of that I’m putting my life’s effort in improving everyone’s education on how to maximize their intelligence and gather useful knowledge so they do become capable of a peaceful transition into creating, managing and maintaining democratic systems.

As with the economics part: I do not think we should aim for plutocracies or technocracies, or any kind of oligarcracy, or dictatorship. But, current world observations as the lack of libertarian economies and the lack of democracies in the world seem to indicate the centralized and static models are the only viable solutions for now.

So, again, I aim for democracy, and probably, I aim for anarchism too, yet in the far future, one where we can actually realistically think about it. A pity that by then I will have likely died by natural causes.

8.2.1.- On how to create a democratic system. A glimpse into the complexity.

Here I will give my best attempt to explain a democratic design and showcase technical ideas to actually implement it. I’m currently working on creating a constitution that is usable in any society that aims to be democratic based on these principle and more. At the end of the day, the design of checks and balances a democracy requires is very aligned to the hacker’s mindset I’ve developed and to the nature of the systems I’m specialized in: CDNs (Consensus based Database Networks), most popularly know nowadays as blockchain or cryptocurrencies.

All I learned about from the other realm of knowledge that political science is was created by Antonio García Trevijano, another Spanish human, rest in peace.

Trevijano wrote all his thoughts on what actually is democracy and how to create it, in general but also showcasing the specific Spanish case on his book: Teoría Pura De La República Constitucional.

It is a hard to read book because it uses old and complex words and it has lots of references to other philosophers’ concepts, historical facts etc And as far as I know it is only in Spanish. Fortunately enough we got AI. If you want to read it just copy-paste pages of the book and translate it to english.

This being said, we can understand as democracy a political regime characterized by its decentralization and dynamism.

That it is achieved via allowing small amounts of people to create new power aspirants and via separating the capabilities of the State into three different independent entities.

The decentralization and dynamism is created in the hope that it will lead to lower degrees of abuse and greater degrees of adaptation.

As per decentralized and dynamic systems, their design and inner workings are more complex than other more centralized or static systems.

Due to their natural by design complexity, the creation of such a system can only be achieved with higher amounts of intelligence than other simpler systems.

On top of that, if the democratic system is wrongly designed, by natural forces as explained, will tend to collapse or risks collapsing in more centralized and static regimes.

Thus, due to their complexity and their nature, stable lasting democracies require more intelligent individuals for their conception and maintenance.

So, a democracy, if we do not care about how much it lasts, is defined by:

- Existence of a State, a body that holds the monopoly on violence.

- Separation and independence from one another of the different capabilities of a State: to think (legislative), to act (executive), to observe and reason (judicial).

- Capability of a small amount of citizens to create their own completely independent power aspiring alternative.

- Capability for most of the citizens to do the previous creation act and to participate on the elections of the State.

Now, due to the sheer size of our societies, we need representatives. So, in practice, democracies in our societies need one more trait in their definition:

- Authentic representation through single-member elections in small electoral districts. Having the represented body the capability of firing the representative anytime.

In smaller societies, like the classical Athens from hundreds of years ago, there was no need for this last trait. People could vote directly, at least the ones who were allowed to do so. Simplified they were the adults, non-slave males with citizenship.

Anyway, the need for representatives creates a new relation of power between entities on the system: representative, represented.

As seen, any power relation can lead to abuse, so we must minimize it. And as seen too, decentralization and dynamism tend to work well given intelligent individuals.

So, via breaking down large societies in small electoral districts, we decentralize the solution. This helps as, in a small district, the power representative will see on the streets the represented ones, and thus, if something is abused, it can have real implications on his live with his neighbors. Real action, real reaction.

From the previous paragraph we can deduce that the represented must have lived and will live in the electoral district for some time as a requisite for the decentralization benefits to manifest.

The dynamism is added by the revocation capability. If the representative, at any time, can be taken away by the represented body, in case of abuse, it will be over soon. This dynamism allows for better adaptive tendencies and creates a natural break, a natural antagonistic force to the power which is temporarily delegated to the representative from the represented one. This helps the system re-balance and not to have an inertia towards centralization and static behavior.

The relation we have analyzed now is just 1 power relation pair in a democratic system. The representative-represented pair. But it is way more complex, there are more pairs to analyze:

- Executive, judicial.
- Executive, legislative.
- Executive, citizens.
- Judicial, legislative.
- Judicial, citizens.
- Legislative, citizens.
- Representatives, legislative.

All these pairs require intelligent design so to create a decentralized and dynamic system with good incentives that lead to minimal or no abuse.

All this is what Trevijano explores on his book while proposing real solutions to balance everything.

I do think that the concepts and technical details explained on that book should be understood by any human in the world.

Not only because, as explained, I aim for democracy, but because the only way for people to create a democracy is for them to know what a democracy truly is.

A lasting democracy, as explained, can only be created by intelligent enough people coordinating. Trevijano called this requirement: proceso de libertad constituyente (process of constituent freedom).

A process in which the great majority of a society is given freedom to chose and propose any possible future and, if chosen a democratic one, truly transition to a that regime.

The process has more details than that, I’m just explaining the overall ideas.

Trevijano explores lots of economical and political self-balancing structures to assure no abuse, or minimal abuse of power. And to assure that if it ever happens, it can be punished.

Some of the following only make sense assuming an intelligent knowledgeable population, the one a lasting democracy requires for its mere conception.

A non-exhaustive list of them are:

- Any political group can not receive any kind of private donation or public funding. It must only be funded by fixed quotas of their members.

- In electoral campaign, public advertisement will be illegal. Known public venues, like schools, will be the only places where political campaign acts will be possible. Each candidate must have the same amount of space and time to speak in each public venue.

- If the country becomes inoperable due to the legislative and executive powers clashing. They can destruct each other at the cost of destructing themselves and creating new elections for both.

- There can be no judge that is chosen by any other part of the other two State powers.

- The districts must be no bigger than 100.000 people.

- There must be separate elections for the executive and the legislative power.

- If someone is chosen in 1 of the branches of power of the State, he can not be in any other in the current mandate nor in the next one.

- If someone power holding person abuses power, that person is immediately kicked out and can not hold any kind of public role for X years (let’s say 15).

The book is really interesting, and the reasons on why these technicalities work independently and together to create a real democracy, in the sense that is real because it will last, are even more interesting too.

Please read it, it will take time and it is a hard read, but it is worth it. On the meanwhile, I’m working myself in the previously mentioned general constitution book that builds on top of Trevijano’s work and aims to even improve it and refine it.

X.- Conclusion: Section 8.2.

This is why I aim for democracy and this is what I mean by democracy. Remember, if you are reading this from a non-democratic country, like mine, as a general rule, do not rush too much.

I recommend not to panic. We have been working as oligarchracies or even dictatorships and we are not extinguished yet. Do not guide yourself by what you see on social media, it is all exaggerated, guide yourself by what you hear when talking and listening to your neighbors or real people in real time.

Getting there requires communication, education, thinking etc Mainly energy demanding cognitive actions. It takes time and effort. Specially more if the current power regime fights against it. A great effort with minimized chaos is required.

Remember, reject chaos. Chaotic protest are more likely to fail because they signal bad organization, and a bad organization won’t create any revolution towards the existing ones, specially if they have been there for a while already.

I understand that unfair situations awaken emotions and can lead to chaos. I’m just trying to friendly remind that that is not the best way and we should aim to master our rational selves to pull out the most intelligent and harder to carry out outcome.

Luckily there are ways so to the current powers fight less against a revolution or directly do not fight and even support it.

It is not easy at all, it can be impossible in some cases, but by all being Cheerful, power holding people and citizens, we can make it as real as it can actually be.

The goal is not to dethrone people and put new ones, the goal is not to get richer, the goal is to make everyone more intelligent so we can coordinate better and achieve greater and more lasting happiness via the creation and maintenance of every time more decentralized and dynamic protocols.

You can make that inside any power regime, with patience just by being a selfless teacher, educate people, yourself, try make them respectfully grow. And slowly and organically democracy should come.

This advise comes from what I am observing in my country. In Spain we had a dictatorship long ago, 1939-1978. When the dictator died then we transitioned to an oligarcracy, yet due to: reasons, the people were brainwashed into thinking it is a democracy. The thing is that this transition was peaceful, because it was not a drastic change.

The transition to a more decentralized system did not come fully from within, external nations, with more decentralized and dynamic power mechanics, influenced with economical pressure for example, on Spain’s “democratic” transition.

Despite this, I think with an intelligent enough population, like a Cheerful population, a nation can still transition to a more decentralized and dynamic system without the need of international interests influencing.

The thing is that now, slowly but surely, lots of people are realizing that Spain is not a democracy and why exactly that is. Knowledgeable people have been explaining why for decades, Trevijano himself was alive and on exile when the dictatorship and did not stop preaching that Spain was an oligarcracy and not a democracy until he died.

As a curious observation, maybe, if we do not want more wars, we might have to pass through a period of oligarcracies when coming from dictatorships in order to transition to democracies. It makes sense, as this transition is smoother and less prone to trauma and tension. 

In Spain, agnostic to public money, associations of citizens are peacefully preaching how we should change the entire political system, from its deepest roots, the constitution and all, to make it a true democracy.

It truly seems like, we can transition to decentralized and dynamic systems without the need for wars. We just have to be patient selfless teachers.

That is what I meant with no rush, big changes require drastically different actions, which, if you are not intelligent enough, they can easily lead to uncontrolled chaos that does more bad than good.

I do not recommend drastic actions, but I get that, if survival is not granted, they are not an option but just an impulse, an instinct.

I know that some oppressive regimes will have killed families and other horrendous stuff. Repeating myself, when survival is not granted, Cheerfulism requires a miracle to be triggered.

I wish the best of lucks to the most extreme circumstances. Yet please do not forget, at the end of the day, we should land in a place where the idea of “the other” does not exist. Where the thing that exists is “another me” or “my neighbor”. At personal levels and international levels.

8.3.- The best way forward I can think of: CDL.

Finally, after explaining all these details, I can propose the way forward for all societies.

So, by being Cheerful, by living abiding as much as I could by the human axioms, here is what I concluded to be the best way we can manage to exist as a society. Feel free to frame it from another angle of reality, I would love to read that.

The answer is CDL. Which stands for:

Cheerfulism, Democracy and Libertarianism.

I think the members of this triad balance each other beautifully. I will dare to say perfectly.

There is a deep trait that is always present in effective solutions that we humans have thought of. We saw this in the power dynamics coordination problem, the resource management problem and the educational problem. The common trait is:

Decentralizing variable handling, a.k.a. problem solving, to proven intelligent individuals.

The 3 components of CDL strongly aligns a society to this principle in some way or another.

Let’s understand why CDL works well by understanding the individual weaknesses of its parts.

Democracy’s failure is: What the majority decides might just not be a good decision. The same way individuals can take bad decisions, societies can too in a democracy.

Libertarianism’s failure is: A free human does not really exist and therefore it can still abuse others and take bad decisions.

So just by these 2 protocols we are still not optimizing for the minimization of abuse or optimization of happiness.

For precisely that we need Cheerfulism. Cheerful individuals are less likely to take bad decisions due to their focus on maximizing intelligence. Furthermore it naturally leads to less abuse. This is because intelligent individuals realize that they must live with others, and they can also realize that cooperation over competition or conflict is a less chaotic, easier to manage, solution on the long term.

Sure, if they are too dumb, they can just not be capable of realizing this and abuse will occur. There is always that theoretical and statistical risk. Personally, as per personal experience, most people do realize that cooperation is better than conflict in the long term. Otherwise frequent street fights would be normalized in all around the globe. Yet there is a big chunk of it where frequent normalized street fights do not happen. Signaling that this is just ignorance leading to poor coordination. Or other controllable abuse sources instead of uncontrollable ones like dumbness or psychopathy.

If uncontrollable sources of abuse were the main cause of violence on the world then violence would exist everywhere, it would be the norm in each street. But it does not, so it can be controlled to some extent, thereby we should maximize for that.

Another negative point for democracy and libertarianism is that they are harder to implement because they require more complex systems created and maintained by a higher collective intelligence. Cheerfulism also balances that by promoting the maximization of each person’s intellectual capabilities.

Continuing, libertarianism and democracy are the most capable protocols for allowing the decentralization of variable handling to intelligent individuals, which tends to better outcomes. Each in their respective fields or problems, these are economy and politics.

But, as another missing trait of these two protocols, none says anything about how to create intelligent individuals. Cheerfulism does.

Let’s keep naming weak spots. Democracy and libertarianism guide people with the goal and premise of a future with more freedom. But freedom was never the desire at the deepest core of human nature.

More fragile becomes the soul of a group without a goal that is really shared and biological, that is what Cheerfulism is for too. To guide ourselves towards a goal we will always share, the goal of happiness.

Nonetheless, I want to clarify that it is not one or the other, it is which one should we prioritize and use as the main guidance.

I think a better engine, a better core principle that leads to more human well-being can be reached if we focus mainly on happiness and not on freedom, because it is more natural and its search is always real, all the time, regardless.

Sure, only after survival is granted. But freedom operates in the same way, no-one seeks freedom when they starve, they seek food. I’m assuming granted survival as said earlier.

People gather and party together, they bond together, because they are ultimately feeling happy, not because they are feeling free. Freedom can make you feel happy, and that is why we ultimately like it and can get addicted to it. Not vice-versa.

Any source of happiness brings the risk of addiction with it. Some are easier to fall into, some are harder, but all do bring the risk. This is another reason why we must not ignore the intelligence part.

Regardless of freedom seekers or protection seekers, if you seek happiness, you can talk to both and they will not perceive you as the other, because you have common ground. Because happiness is a deeper shared truth, it can help us coordinate with less conflict too.

As a metaphor for this. Libertarianism and socialism are a couple that broke up due to misunderstandings and lack of communication lead arguments. Cheerfulism would be the common friend who still hangs out with both, which is listened by and listens to both, and has the capability of fixing the relationship in the future.

When we guide ourselves based on deeper principles that always hold, we can reach deeper understandings and reach greater goals by crafting more effective and complex solutions. And for successful guidance, regardless of what is the core you choose, regardless of freedom or happiness, you have to mix it with the maximization of intelligence for optimal well-being and being able to handle chaos and uncertainty, which conform risk. Cheerfulism is both, happiness and intelligence.

Ultimately I’m not libertarian and seek to maximize freedom, I’m Cheerful and I seek to maximize intelligence and optimize happiness, I can only think and reason through deeper principles when I think of happiness, and that, overall, leads to more understanding that has greater potential of prosperity.

As a scientific parallelism, some Einstein equations can be “simplified” logically and correctly into Newton’s ones. This doe not mean Newton is always wrong, the same way in which putting individual freedom at the core is not always wrong, it just means that Einstein’s equations hold true for a larger set of reality’s contexts. Happiness focus would be Einstein, Newton would be freedom focus. However, you need to be intelligent to discover and use any of them.

Concluding with my favoritism to Cheerfulism, because action (power) and means (resources) are nothing without a deeply shared goal (happiness). And because failure awaits us in the future if we do not think and adapt (intelligence).

These are the reasons why we need to add Cheerfulism to this triad.

A triangle shaped engine of action, representing the self-balancing principle it leads to: CDL.

But hey, let’s not rush, we still have to talk about the weakness of Cheerfulism. It has an unavoidable flaw: We can still make mistakes, we can still take bad decisions.

That is why I always repeat, it is all statistics, we can not assure success, just optimize for its likelihood to be greater. That is what CDL aims for.

Also, if resources are truly limited, then survival instincts kick-in, critical thinking gets kicked-off and Cheerfulism is turned-off.

That is why, even if there is a fight for survival-related resources, we must not forget, that after the fight, CDL is what we must strive to achieve.

8.3.1.- How to transition to CDL.

There are 7 possible combinations of current societies as per if they follow CDL or not.

These are the 3 different variables:

- Cheerful or not Cheerful.
- Democratic or not democratic.
- Libertarian or not libertarian.

All possible starting points are:

1.- Cheerful, Not-Democratic, Libertarian.
2.- Cheerful, Democratic, Not-Libertarian.
3.- Cheerful, Not-Democratic, Not-Libertarian.
4.- Not-Cheerful, Democratic, Libertarian.
5.- Not-Cheerful, Not-Democratic, Libertarian.
6.- Not-Cheerful, Democratic, Not-Libertarian.
7.- Not-Cheerful, Not-Democratic, Not-Libertarian.

The ideal transitions are the ones the image that follows shows.

In red you will see the harder to change states and harder to change transitions, in yellow, less hard to change ones, and in green, the easiest ones and the end goal:



I think these are the best paths to follow, and now I will explain why.

I think the best first step is for a society to become Cheerful. Because Cheerful individuals adapt better, which will only facilitate the other possible transition steps.

You can see that the process requires at most 3 steps and, as little, 1 step. The goal is to all states, all circles, to follow these arrows and reach the green state: CDL.

Furthermore, as per their intelligence and happiness oriented action, Cheerful individuals do not like chaos and tend not to create it, as it is harder to control and live through. If it is unavoidable or mistakes are taken as per human nature, chaos will arise or be chosen though.

Even in that case, in the case of conflict, they are the best enemies you can have. As their traits naturally lead them to minimize abuse, thus revenge is less likely or less severe.

After a Cheerful transition, then I think the best next step is a democratic transition. This is a complex topic that will be addressed later in the chapter.

Wether you come from oligarchic power dynamics or dictatorial ones, it is likely that powerful individuals will have abused their power. So transitioning to a system where they have less can be scary to them. How to deal with it was covered in chapter 4. In part, as mentioned there, a transition through education is the safest bet for abusive powerful-ones. Thus this is another reason why understanding the system of education, chapter 6, is so vital.

The reasons on why aiming for transitioning to a democracy where explained in chapter 4 and 7.2.

And finally, the last step, a transition to libertarianism.

I do not think libertarianism is possible under non-democratic regimes. At least not for more than short time periods. This is because oligarchies and small groups of individuals can always be bribed every now and then by wealthy enough individuals or groups. Bribery is an act that can lead to abuse. Abuse creates chaos and that makes intelligent adaptation more difficult.

A non-democratic and libertarian system would be one where money moves very freely and power does too, which, by natural inertia in similar ways of those explained in previous sections, those two forces, instead of clashing against each other, will just tend to go in the same direction because it is easier: centralization, static behavior, thus lack of adaptation, and eventually abuse. Sure, exceptions can happen, but exceptions are.

The reasons on why aiming for transitioning to libertarianism were explained in chapter 5.

And as seen, changes, of any kind, are better done and handled through education. Specially education aligned with human nature. For that refer to all explained in chapter 6.

Note that the graph presented is incomplete, of course a country can go from state 7 to state 5 for example. For simplicity, I’ve just drawn and explained the ones which I think are the best transitions.

I could draw all transitions from all states and argue against why those are not the best, but that would be a total of 28 transitions to analyze. I will leverage my laziness and encourage you to train your engineer’s thinking by analyzing them.

For example, the one mentioned from state 7 to state 5. I think it is less optimal because it would naturally would go back to state 7. For the reason explained above, a libertarian not-democratic regime does not last long. Thus it would go back to state 7: non-libertarian, non-democratic.

We could further complete the graph with diversifying the not-something tags. Like instead of not-democratic, specifying: dictatorship or oligarchic. Instead of not-libertarian specifying: socialist, communist, anarchist. Instead of Cheerful: any other predominant philosophy.

If we do this, we would have a graph where every single society on earth would belong to one of its nodes. And then, each person, according to their situation would just have to optimize the path to reach the green CDL node.

An advice that arose from personal observation. If your country is a dictatorship, it is harder to transition directly to a democracy, it might be less chaotic to first transition to an oligarchy and then to a democracy. If you want to do drastic changes then you must make sure all your society is intelligent enough, otherwise you will get chaos and either not create a transition or even move in the opposite direction.

I hope all of you think about this, on your society, and where it fits on the graph and what is the optimal path to reach the CDL. I’ve done it for mine.

8.3.2.- A factor is missing in the name: Education.

CDL is missing an E. Which stands for EBTAA, the already mentioned in earlier chapters, Education Based on Trust Accountability and Adaptation.

In any kind of transition from a non-CDL state to a more aligned CDL state, you nee change, and the key of effective and efficient change, as seen is learning, educating.

Wether in the transition from non-libertarian to libertarian, from non-Cheerful to Cheerful, or from non-democratic to democratic, an effective and efficient education is vital.

Specially in the power dynamics part of the triad, as explained in the world peace chapter, abuse can not be deleted, just minimize, the education of future generations plays a crucial role in the most optimal and realistic technique for transitioning from one power protocol that likely had abuse to another one where power is more decentralized. This was the technique of temporary clearly pretended ignorance.

And as explained in the education chapter and as highlighted on chapter, humanity is facing a challenge which is that most of people are too lazy to train their brains. This has similar barriers than the ones people have to not start physical training. And, the best way to create a habit, which is what training ultimately is, is to teach it during the early years of a human.

When people get older, change, training, gets harder, thus getting used to it at early stages in life is essential.

So, even if education, and specially EBTAA is not in the name. It is inside CDL. CDL can only be possible when people have trained their brains. Which is easily achieved if starting in early stages of life, done properly through an EBTAA based education.

8.3.3.- The international factor influence on the transition.

All said it is fine in a national context, however in international landscapes, this ideal transition paths presented might not be possible.

Because some nations depend on abusing others, therefore, they will likely not help, in fact they might even put impediments towards other nations that are being abused so to transition either to Cheerfulism, democracies or libertarian protocols, because if they succeed on the mission, those abused nations will be way harder to abuse. And the abusive nation will lose all the good it was getting from the abuse.

As seen in the abuse section, abusers might abuse because of 2 reasons: lack of intelligence due to stupidity or dumbness which leads to them unable to figure out better less abusive or maybe even non-abusive ways of interacting with you, or, because of he abuser thinking he is capable of controlling you without generating uncontrollable chaos on the process.

This matter is a complex one. Because the factors that affect the eventual action of a nation abusing another are very varied. For example, a nation might accidentally abuse another one because they vote a government that has a very aggressive international attitude, however maybe the voters did not intend that and they are not capable of realizing it because they are focused on other matters which are perceived with a higher priority than international actions.

The abusive action might not even have a voting mechanism and the decision is dependent on a small group of oligarchs which might overestimate their capabilities of abuse etc.

Regardless of the configuration and the entity who decides to abuse, the fundamental drivers of the abuse are the 2 reasons explained.

I could get theoretical again and analyze every combinations. But that would take likely triplicating the length of this book, in my opinion, unnecessarily.

As per my current understanding, I think most of the international abuse happens is driven with the strongest force by the scenario of people being to cognitively busy with other topics rather than international dilemmas.

I’m talking specially a very specific nation which is clearly starting to see and feel the limits of biting more than it can chew, trying to control by force and corruption others. However, as said, names do not matter, what matter is understanding.

I’m aware that in the international landscape some nations won’t be able to transition ideally to CDL, even if they so desire, due to external abuse. However, if the abuser transitions to CDL, the abuse applied externally will be reduced, as more intelligent individuals will be able to solve their current tensions better.

And in scenarios of less tension, arises trust and clarity, which further promotes finding middle ground of agreement that reduces abuse.

These chains of thought resemble a lot the ones in the world peace chapter. Because they are based on the same realistic fundamental dynamics.

So, as with world peace, if we want our society to move towards CDL we can not just logically wait for it to happen, we must strive for it. And if we all strive for it at the same time, mutual understanding will be maximized.

8.3.2.- CDL applied to Spain.

How could it be otherwise, because I’m Spanish and I know this society better than any other, here I will showcase an example of a manifesto for the Spanish population on how I think  they should transition to CDL.

For context, Spain is economically socialist and politically an oligarcracy. Philosophically, to be honest, I do not really know. People do not seem to have a main train of thought, as modern artists say, this is the remix.

We do actually have strong christian religious values roots and influence though, even though its practice has weakened a lot, philosophy wise we are sort of aligned with that.

Anyway, unless a religion or predominant philosophy is strongly opposed of making people more intelligent, which does not seem to be the case on Spanish one, transitioning to Cheerfulism should just be compatible with any other predominant philosophy or religion.

A very strong feature of Cheerfulism is that, because it is so aligned with human nature, it does not really matter with which other religion or philosophy has to coexist with. Cheerfulism does not deny, negate or censor their existence, it just supports them and dances along with them. Just as the image at the beginning of the chapter.

This same reasoning also applies to economical, political or educational adaptations.

Given this context on Spain and the viability analysis of Cheerfulism on it, this could be some action principles based on CDL for Spain:

CDL - Spain
(Cheerfulism, Democracy and Libertarianism)

1.
Spain should adopt Cheerfulism as a guiding philosophy.

2.
Spain should transition to a true democracy.
CDL defines democracy as the system that adheres to the three principles established by Antonio García-Trevijano on his work "Teoría Pura de la República":

- Separation of the three powers of government at their origin.

- Authentic representation through single-member elections in small electoral districts.

- Collective political freedom as the foundation of the system.

3.
Spain should move toward a strongly libertarian economic system.
CDL defines libertarianism as the next step of centralization beyond anarchism. In a libertarian society, public money exists but is kept to the minimum necessary to fund a public army that enforces the law. Individuals have private money and may use it freely to organize resources, as long as they do not break the law.

4.
Every point described here is a recommendation. CDL does not impose change, it recommends it, specially via education. It believes that the most prosperous change comes from conviction, not coercion.

5.
Spain’s education should be based on the principles of EBTAA: Education based on trust, accountability and adaptation.

6.
The points above are based on logical reasoning inferred from human biology: a human being
always strives to be happy, and to succeed in that task it is essential to cooperate intelligently with one's neighbors.

Cooperation requires a balance of power that prevents, as much as physically possible, one
neighbor from abusing another. Therefore, a democratic system is recommended. The imperfection of democracy is summed up by the phrase: “If the people are foolish, foolish things will be decided.” Hence, CDL also promotes the philosophy of Cheerfulism as a counterbalance to this weakness.

To understand happiness and to maximize human intelligence, one must understand the
Cheerfulist philosophy.

And for the most efficient allocation of resources, it is recommended to combine this with an
economic system that strongly tends toward libertarianism. It must be emphasized that this system is not perfect, and just as the branches of power check and balance one another in a democracy, the inefficiencies and contradictions of libertarianism are counterbalanced by democracy and by the Cheerful citizens. Thus, CDL aims to coordinate the three fundamental pillars of any society. In this case, the Spanish society: mind (processing and analysis of information), force (the body’s action), and organization (coordination of information into action).

All this transition catalyzed by the usage of an EBTAA educational system and attitude. One that promotes a revenge minimized transition and habits to maintain the effort required to order the existing and potential chaos.

6.
CDL recommends these principles of action to every known human society, adapting the transition process described in point 7 to the social reality in each case.

7.
In the Spanish case, CDL recommends the following transition from the current system to the
proposed one:

- First: Emphasize Cheerfulism, to clarify the goals and principles of action. At the same time, introduce to the people the understanding of EBTAA.

- Second: Emphasize achieving real democracy, so that Cheerful individuals may begin to act using their fullest potential and power decentralization is carried out with minimal cycles of hate.

- Last: Emphasize the pros and cons of the libertarian economic model, so that, in a democratic system with a Cheerful mindset, its implementation may begin.

- The transition is recommended to be as peaceful as possible through temporary clearly pretended ignorance towards the disastrous acts of the current oligarchies. These are the political class and any individual which its monetary income depends fully on the State and the wasting or inefficient spending of public funds.

Hatred leads to chaos, and in chaos, prosperity is hindered. However, violence is sometimes inevitable by nature, and punishment of the clearly abusive faction of the oligarchy will occur if society so demands.

Still, CDL strongly recommends avoiding such punishment, although it will not actively work to stop it if it unfolds.

In the case of a transition from the Spanish Oligarchic system to a democratic one, the usage of temporary clearly pretended ignorance (TCPA) would make sense.

As per Trevijano’s analysis, since real democracy can only arise from absolute social conviction and action, TCPA is doable in a democratic transition because the same strong conviction and action is required for succesfully executing TCPA. 

However, due to Spain’s population size, as TCPA only minimizes revenge, any famous oligarch related to known corruption cases is at risk of a minority hunting him or her. Maybe even at risks of being killed because of their accumulated negligence cases through the decades which have actually caused real deaths. Like in the recent 2024 DANA floodings in Valencia’s territory.

Due to Spain’s great levels of debt, spending more money on the protection of these individuals is discouraged and exile is the cheapest option. Either way, the oligarchs holding fame related to negligence or corruption must be either protected or exiled to abide by TCPA and create the less chaos possible.

8.
CDL has no leader.

Although it was created by Spanish citizen Carlos Alegre Urquizú, CDL is a set of ideas intended to transform Spanish society by winning what is popularly known as the cultural battle. Thus, the figure of the creator holds no power over the ideas once they are explained.

As long as a person defends these eight points, they may consider themselves part of CDL, regardless of any other factor.

Any political or other organization created to promote CDL’s principles must clearly state that it is not CDL. For example, if the creator were to found a political party, its name should reflect that it is a personification of the ideas, not the ideas themselves: e.g. CDL-PP (Cheerfulness, Democracy, Liberty – Political Party).

If that party ultimately fails to adhere to these principles, CDL will remain unaffected, as it is a set of ideas and not a physical being nor collective.

This distinction is intended to help citizens foster critical thinking and debate about ideas themselves, rather than about the people trying to apply them. In this way, society is encouraged to focus on goals and clear methods to achieve them, and thus they are less likely to elevate any leader or leaders into a fanaticism based tyranny.

X.- Conclusion: Chapter 8.

This chapter marks the end of part 2 of the book. Here I’ve connected, polished and summarized all the ideas and analysis on what I think it can happen if we manage to become Cheerful.

The rest is up to you.

Will you be willing to train your mind? Will you be willing to understand happiness and realize what patterns bring it to you?

Will you be able to combine both in order to figure out ways to get them in an abuse minimized way? Will you contribute to world peace? Will you dance? Will you clash?

Will you selflessly help others on the way? Will you do it with friends? Will you find new friends? Will you teach and be taught by friends?

Will you need no extra money? Will you need more money? Will you need less? Will you need more health? Will you need more freedom?

Will you smile? Will you cry? Will you find lasting happiness?

There is only one way of knowing, and that is trying.

Go learn, get the habit, start with the curricula presented in the book if you will, start learning this book itself if you will, criticize it please, burn it to intellectual ashes if you can, or get convinced by it if you find it reasonable, adapt CDL to your country’s situation, whatever, just do it, learn, explore, seek happiness.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transition from Part 2 to Part 3.

The following part of the book is meant to strengthen all explanations given so far by giving more details on the reasons behind the specific wording used.

I will also give more details on how this book has bee written and who I am. This is so you can better see any possible biases I might have.

This third part is meant for those who seek depth and do not mind going into more complex reasoning. If you are just a normal casual reader trying to understand concepts in this book, don’t worry if you don’t fully grasp this third part.

In fact, what I would love you to do, is to think about all read, write down questions about things you do not understand or things you think I’m wrong about. Well, as you might have noticed, I’m proposing it again, to use the thinking like an engineer process to analyze the book so far and then, after you have found your useful answers, proceed reading this part.

In this more detailed part you will find answers to why I chose certain words and what details they encapsulate. And then maybe those details answer your questions, or make you understand all better, or even proof me right or wrong against any of your initial doubts about anything written so far.

So yeah, I think it might be more enriching to first analyze this book like an engineer and then read this part.

Anyway, if you are too curious, or too lazy, or you just want to read: Welcome to part 3! :)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

