-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-
-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-

[ Part 3: Boring Cheerful details about this book. ]

-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-
-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9.- Cheerfulism created itself. On the evolution of the philosophy and its natural roots.

9.1.- Nature created instincts and a society, and those created Cheerfulism.

This is the story on how the Cheerful philosophy created itself. It is a pretty nice example of how it has been developed, since its inception, based on human needs and natural feelings.

This part will be told like a story, not completely as a full analysis as all so far, it will add more human feeling to the book and make it more interesting to read for some. This way I will also give personal details on myself so you can better picture who I am and you can better picture any possible biases from which I write this book. Let’s start.

This was some day on the first half of 2019 or on the last months of 2018, I started Cheerfulism when I was 16 years old. A deep depression caused by boredom appeared. I remember it clearly, I was in my previous year to entering university, in a math class, being taught what integrals are. I always seated in the first row, next to the wall, leaning into it and just chilling there, listening and learning, sometimes speaking, but as teachers liked me I could speak more than usual before being called out. I usually was fine, smiling, participating in class and just fine.

It was normal for teachers to sometimes ask me stuff about the class and all, not in a higher frequency than to others but it was normal, yet that day I was clearly looking depressed, I clearly remember just looking at my notebook while the teacher was explaining, I remember the teacher looking at me and me looking back at her, she clearly wanted to ask me about something on the current lesson but with my sight I said everything: “Jut don’t, I don’t feel like it”. She clearly understood and stopped looking at me, respected my mood and said no word to me for the rest of the class.

Then in a side of the notebook I started drawing and thinking: Shit I’m so bored, this is horrible it is like being dead, damn, what is happiness? Mmmm… Then a Spanish song came to my mind, from “Cristina y los Stop: Tres cosas hay en la vida, salud dinero y amor.” Translated to english: There are three things in life, health, money and love. I will leave here  a youtube link to the song if you are reading this in a era where Youtube exists: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vB3jQ-j4yus.

And naturally from that, yet without being aware of the structure I was following, I started applying engineering thinking on the matter. So I started analyzing boredom and life based on my current horrible existence of feeling boredom 24/7 and the facts stated in this catchy song.

Alright, I thought first, health, is that true? Do you really need health? I mean there are fat people who are happy and being fat is not healthy, this song must be wrong, or at least it needs refinement.

Here we got it, fixed variable resolution technique, even if I did not know what that was back then, I was using it in effective ways. So I left behind the health factor, then fixed the other factors, money and love and the I started analyzing health again. I kept and kept going, and when I got all of them I thought, well, why are they not mentioning boredom? It does not matter how much love you have, health or even money, if you are bored, you are fucked. And I was the living example for that: my family was not rich but we were not poor either. We could afford eating out and holidays every year, living actually in a small rural area, in a valley, with oaks and nature all around, with my house in a fairy-tale studio Ghibli style movie positioned literally next to a river and in front of a medieval castle. All within an area that has the population density of a desert, around 2.100 people were in the village, and it was the biggest village in the region, the others were less than 1.000 people. A remote cute little small part of the world, in the countryside of Spain in the late 2010s.

I had stability in my family and in the ecosystem around me, no crimes, a safe small little village etc etc That brought be love, that brought me enough money to be fine, and I was healthy. And even with that I was not happy, I was the completely opposite, feeling dead alive. Apathetic, depressed, nothing sparked any joy on me. Yet I was always smiling to people, my school peers called me by my nickname: Cheerful, yet in Spanish, Alegre. They did so because my name is common there so there were multiple Charles (Carlos) to distinguish form, but also because it fit my character and it was my last name.

But cheerfulness was escaping me, I could feel it, and I didn’t want that to happen, I did not want to feel dead. So I kept days and days thinking, refining my understanding based on my personal feelings, situation and just by myself. No powerful AI existed yet, ChatGPT will not exists for the following 4 years. So it was just me, thinking, imagining definitions, fixing variables, solving others, learning about boredom, hobbies, what love is, what happiness is, why it is the way it is etc etc. And all just from my own mind, I did not want external influence.

Passing day and night in that small village, surrounded by nature, with little more activities than just walking, thinking, playing video-games and seeing small amounts of familiar and known faces.

Part of not wanting external influence was because I am not very social by nature. During my kid years I was not social due to fear. I was not shy either, even if it looked like. I was just scared. One day, when I was around like 6, my father told me something like: What the fuck, why are you so scared, do you think the bakery guy is going to eat you or what? Then I realized, as rational as I was, I took that literally, the baker eating me, like cannibalism, that indeed, that was not going to happen and it made no sense to be worried about it. So I felt like a fool and slowly stopped being scared. Yet still, after that, I was not social, I just did not feel interesting enough the act of interacting with people, even less with their thoughts.

Also, seeing people not solving problems successfully made me not want to get influenced by their minds or ideas or presence. This was more on my teenage time, why would I listen to you if you are clearly contradicting yourself? You make no sense thus I do not care about you. That is, overall, how I thought about others back then, if I even thought about them in the first place. As a kid I only cared about having fun and being close to my family, playing with my dad, seeing my little brother 7 years younger than me, playing with my cousin, visiting granny’s house or hugging my mother, that is it.

As you can see, my natural instinct was to be rational and just do not care at all about others, specially if they did not make sense too, because that, for whatever reason, was just not interesting to me.

I was really direct, painfully direct, I said whatever I thought, because for me it made no sense to hide or manipulate information by nature. And on top that, I only saw this causing struggles to the people who did so.

I’ve always been like this until around my 17-18 when I moved to Barcelona to start studying software engineering. Then I started listening to people, getting interested on them, actually starting to develop empathy and be slightly more cautious on not to hurt people, but still making where I stand clear. The thing is, I did this out of pure boredom, not out of real interest on people. I was so bored, so miserable, that anything, even what felt uninteresting for years and years was good enough to give it a try.

And it worked, I found out how much I love dancing, how people can actually be interesting regardless of their contradictions. I made friends, I partied a lot, around twice a week, even three times a week some times. I hanged out a lot, made lots of different plans, I even found a girlfriend for some months and we had a beautiful time together, it was a modern no-limits open relationship. A very very big change, with very big new discoveries about myself.

In a matter of weeks I passed from being isolated in a tiny Spanish village on a sort of desert, it really is just 2-3 times more dense that Lapland, to being at a university in a big city, accidentally living in a flat on a students residency full of exchange students from all over the world. Meeting all of them, all their cultures, at any time of the day. Even me, suddenly, somehow, being one of the main organizers of big parties, events, bringing people of different groups together. Dancing all around, experiencing almost everything there is to experience, with almost not limits, the only limit was hard drugs. Which some of my friends did, and I observed, I analyzed.

I’m explaining all these so you can see that the principles of Cheerfulism and human nature I discovered were just an accident of me living my life. A mix of my natural and rational introspective nature, mixed with extreme isolation conditions who lead to extreme boredom and then accidentally fueled the seek for extreme quick life changes that appeared from the boredom I felt, which awakened the need to explore.

I eventually realized, I was looking for happiness, exploring in an emotional and crazy way, but all balanced with a rational touch and nature. By being in the extremes I understood the rule.

During all this time I was always writing Cheerfulism, improving it with the lessons learned, thoughts I thought, new insights etc

Yet it wasn’t until the creation of version 0.0.4 of this book, where as you might have seen I started reading other people’s thoughts on life matters in books. Why? It was just my natural instinct since I’m a kid, to not obey if you do not make sense, to make things on my own, reject authority if it contradicted what I felt, whether that authority was my parents, my teachers or whatever. I never sought for answers that did not come from my mind and experience, because I saw people contradicting themselves too much and never rectifying or acknowledging it so I was like mmm… yeah why should I even pay attention to all these.

I even told my literature teacher in high-school, in front of the whole class, that her teachings were useless. But in a respectful manner, I said something like: Hey, I don’t like this, this, in my life, is useless. I get that art is useful etc etc but not in my life and I really hate what you are teaching. In a really respectful way I disagreed and made clear I dot like what I’m being forced to do. She answered really well, something like: I know, maybe if you think it this way it might be more useful, the mind is like a money box, even if you put small worthless pennies there, it is still better than no penny. I then answered, I get what you say but in this case it is not even a penny, or something like that. A classmate told me after, I don’t know where you took the bravery to say all this in front of the teacher. Then I said, well, it was just the truth.

Curiously enough, my natural fear to others that I had when I was a kid, has greatly influenced a tendency I have to respectfully communicate my disagreement. Because I was afraid of violence, now I just hate it, I always try to avoid it. Making the other one not to feel like you are a threat is the first step to avoid violence, I quickly and naturally learned that, which also helped during my crazy exploration time to gain even more insights from people with way different lifestyles, personalities and backgrounds than mine. Further enhancing the variety of information I exposed myself into and further solidifying and helping me draw conclusions you have read in the book.

Anyway, regarding defying authority which made no sense to me, I also even said to the priest of the village, when I was around 5: To believe in good is for stupid people. Of course back then I did not understand religion as I do now, and I’ve changed my mind, but yeah, another authority being called out without shame. I know this story because my older cousin told me, she said it was very funny to see the priest and my mother’s reaction. The priest said something like: Do you believe in god? And then I just said it, no, it is for stupid people. And this came naturally, my parents did not teach me that. For me, anything that could not be proven or shown was fool, trust in something you can’t see was fool, stupid. As you can see, my natural instincts were really scientific from a young age. Always trying to reason, to understand, to fix as little variables as possible.

Around seven I remember clearly trying to understand why the algorithm we were being taught for division of fractions was the way it was, I was so curious, but why, why, why, until I broke it down in smaller logical pieces, I could not intuitively understand it. It was so hard to do I can still remember the experience.

Here you might be seeing different parts of the thinking like an engineer process, divide in sub-modules, breaking down, finding answers, imagining answers, linking it all. Doing it all since I’m around 7.

And all kept going, I kept growing, learning, discovering the world, feeling the world, with very little limits, being honest to myself and with a natural tendency to respectfully say fuck off I don’t care about you.

I realized how inefficient Spanish university was, how useless was the future awaiting for me if I kept inside it, at my second year I dropped out.

Saying I went to university is kinda an exaggeration, I attended at most 10% of the classes, included exams. I failed a bunch of subjects I considered useless, I preferred to party and spend time with others, it felt, and looking back it was, more useful.

I had a very clear plan, I can learn faster and more useful stuff than what is being taught here, so I will youtube-tutorial my way to a software related job and then I will be even freer with no fixed studying schedules or useless exams. Powerful AI still did not exist, it was launched to the public around 6 months after I dropped out. I wish it was created earlier, I would have dropped out even sooner.

I stayed in the city partying for some months, and then I thought, okay let’s isolate in my village to fully focus on learning and landing a job. Summing up, fast forward 2 years of village isolation and study with free resources online, winning prizes on hacking competitions, traveling to conferences around the globe like Bangkok and New York with the money of those prizes and meeting more experts and companies, and boom I landed a crazy good job as a blockchain security researcher. The job, described with more day to day language, would be like being a cryptocurrencies hacker.

As you can see, rejecting non-logical stuff from more authorities like universities or traditional educational paths, exploring, moving, thinking, focusing on useful stuff, talking to experts that have proven to be useful or know stuff. All lessons explained in the book and learned through just living, contributing to my understanding of human nature and my book who was slowly becoming more and more ambitious.

My plan was driven by conviction, the conviction of: I can do this better. I did not know how I would do it, I knew I had unlimited and quick access to information with internet and that with that it was enough. So I started moving. I did not even know I was going to land at cryptocurrencies cybersecurity, my first idea was to just land a generic software engineer job at Google. And then, I refined it on the way, fixing variables, solving others etc

Yes, I’m successful, but as it is commonly said, it is lonely at the top, also the way to the top is lonely. All this randomness, defying standards in all shapes, in education, in love with only accepting open relationships, dressing randomly and colorfully, which if you are not famous, people just think you are weird and tend to reject you or just ask for a photo and leave. Seeking truth, slowly but surely, systematically made me face lots of feeling lonely moments, crying and all. But well, at least I was not feeling dead alive like when I was bored. If you add on top of that my natural tendency to be alone, it lead to lots, and is till leading to, even though way less, loneliness and sad moments.

That does not mean Cheerfulism will make you sad. It just means that in a world of conformism and slowly changing beliefs, seeking truth, specially in the fast paced extreme way I did, leads you to feel alone, even when having people around you. Because no one really understands what you are looking for or why you are doing things.

If the world would have been Cheerful, or if I would just have explored more slowly, I would have not felt that lonely. Just saying this for those of you who might give this a try, if you go too fast, you will likely have to deal with loneliness. Anyway I hope it is clear that Cheerfulism is not the cause of loneliness, even though in modern days, if you are too Cheerful you will face a bunch.

And I hope this also shows clearly that in life not all is success, there is also failure and sadness. The key is to adapt and react intelligently. It is all just part of having to solve problems, of our biological internal workings.

I seriously think I’m biologically broken, in the sense that if I was born in the Neanderthal era I would have been kicked out of the tribe due to not fitting in and then died. I feel like that natural human instinct was not coded on me, and if I had born in previous times where dependency to others was higher, I would have really died.

But yeah, all these natural instincts of mine lead me to realize and try find the deepest common shared scientific truth on how to be happy. And I accidentally happened to use the best techniques and attitudes for learning appropriate to any human being almost since I was born. Critical thinking on complex problems, reflection in an independent, little to no influenced creative way first and then comparing to others and learning from others etc etc. Always prioritizing myself feeling well over what I was told to do. In a natural, no drugs influenced search of that biological chemical reaction we call happiness.

I hardly ever drink alcohol and I did not try it before 18 years old. For now I’ve only smoked 3 joints in my life, all after 20 years old. I do think the absence of drugs in my life helped me think better. Also, not taking any drug helped me party as much as I did too, I recovered faster, thus it let me keep exploring more and more. Yet I must confess I fell into caffeine addiction, but that is it.

Cheerfulism is jut a byproduct of my own existence. A curious and independent by instinct guy who just kept living in the societal context he was born into. It has been a happy accident that it is actually the answer to creating utopias.

Cheerfulism was not created as just an idea that popped up in someone’s mind, thinking the best way to live life is to understand happiness and intelligence so then you can maximize the latter in order to optimize the first. It was a process, someone who naturally lived instinctively on those principles and with random stuff happening in his life realized their meaning and usefulness and decided to write it down.

What if I was born in a vibrant city instead of an isolated monotonous countryside and never got so bored so as to feeling dead alive? Would I then never have thought about my instincts and would I have never realized that they are the key to utopias? I guess we will never know.

Cheerfulism is a happy unique accident in history. Societal context like my village, my parents personalities and also my own individual personality are key to its creation.

It has not been an idea that appeared, it was slowly forged, slowly showing itself, slowly growing and maturing like a human does until it reached consciousness and wrote this paragraph on the version 0.0.4 of the book.

This is not a philosophy that just appeared form the ideas realm, top to bottom, but that was originated from observed experience, bottom to top. Naturally, organically.

Furthermore, my personal story serves as the first proof of that it works. Being Cheerful at my 22 years of age and having been Cheerful since I’m really young, has helped me to be already completely independent, thank to the intelligence this philosophy develops in the individual. Thanks to the Cheerful attitude that also brought me friends which helped too. I’m successful and outstanding in a current world filled with repetitive old fashioned behavior that results in stagnated, deteriorating lifestyles, making children have less thriving lives than their parents did. Yet mine is an exception, precisely because of the Cheerful attitude.

This story has been included as a testament to Cheerfulism’s natural roots, a testament of personifying the philosophy as a being on itself, poetically sating that it was at v0.0.4 that the philosophy became fully conscious of itself. Like when kids gains consciousness.

And of course, so the reader has more background on the writer and can spot and think more critically about his biases.

9.2.- Chronological view on the progress so far.

For the curious ones, here is displayed a timeline on the current progress Cheerfulism has gone through and how different milestones have been reached just via living life:

- 2018-2019 (age 16-17): Cheerfulism starts as a guy trying to understand how happiness works and escape his misery.

- 2019: The first draft, containing just the happiness chapter is created as a manual for self usage to remember the conclusions about happiness.

- 2019-2023 (age 17-20): As the author grows, it learns about economics, politics and more parts of human knowledge and life. And wonders and realizes people’s misery, wondering if what he has discovered can be applied and taught to everyone. He figures out that indeed, it can, and starts developing the intelligence-related part of this book and solidifies the principles of Cheerfulism, so far unaltered, which reach until chapter 3 and form the part 1 of this version. The author also includes in the next parts with his understanding of society as a way too proof that the philosophy and attitude can create knowledge and adaptive behavior to understand and adapt the world to you and vice-versa.

- 7th Novemeber 2023 (age 20): Version 0.0.1 is officially made public shared as a PDF via the authors’ Instagram (social media) stories. Furthermore, the author thinks this will be able to be improved and decides to create a Github (software developing platform) repository to keep track of how the philosophy matures over time.

- 29th September 2024 (age 21): Version 0.0.2 is released. Adding the chapter on how to transition to Cheerfulism via education.

- 23rd March 2025 (age 22): Finished and published on the GitHub repository v0.0.3, with a more refined understanding of ethics and a new proposition to create a natural nationalism agnostic to rigid beliefs.

- Somewhere this year, 2025 (age 22): The author realizes via talking to AI and just keep living that this has actual greater potential. So he decides to read other people’s thoughts via books and talking to friends about all this and add new ideas to the book strengthening his philosophy’s proof of utility. Releasing the version, latest so far, 0.0.4.

- Late 2025, early 2026: Version 0.0.5 is released with great and minor changes.  A great one was a more nuanced understanding and explanation on human organizational structures and its dynamics plus the deletion of vague critiques.

- The future: The author plans, during all his live, to spread the word to societies leveraging social media for mass adoption or at least mass understanding of the philosophy and then positively influence human history. Adding new stuff to the book with newer versions as he sees fit. If you also think this has potential, I encourage you to preach it like I do, not just by talking about it but most importantly, by living it.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transition chapter 9 to 10.

Okay now you have a more deep view on how Cheerfulism was created, as you can see it is like a self that created itself, like a god? Like a metaphysics concept?

Welcome to the next boring chapter.

As some might have noticed I use the word boring as a, stuff that would bore me personally, like little details that actually provide value but not too much. Stuff away from the core ideas of a system, that even though it solidifies it and strengthens it, they, for any reason, feel boring to my brain. Well maybe they are not that boring to yours. Maybe you enjoyed reading about my life I don’t know. I hope they are not that boring and you are having fun reading this third part then.

Anyway, welcome to chapter 8, on “to be or not to be, that is the question”, William Shakespeare.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

