5.- Thoughts on the ideal society, part 2: On organizing resources plus the potential influence of Cheerfulism and new tech on it.

The key on the resource organization dilemma resides in, you might have heard this in some economics class, satisfying unlimited desires with limited resources. Humans have invented lots of protocols which usually end in -ism as an attempt to mange the resources as best as possible to create the best outcome. But what is the best outcome? The best society? I define that as follows:

`` A society where everyone has survival statistically granted and is as happy as they can be. And, for that, each individual has enough tools to imagine and pursue a way of finding its peak of happiness. ``

To keep understanding the problem we will need to define all the key points in the spectrum of resource management protocols we will be discussing along: anarchism, libertarianism, socialism and communism.

Before defining them, please note that the way I will define these -isms is different from the nowadays social perception of them. And incorrect or incomplete compared to the academic versions of them.

I do not care, I’ve never been satisfied with any of the explanations I’ve heard on the analysis of the resource management problem. Wether I was listening to actual academic professionals on each “-ism” or to normal people in the street, I felt something was missing, I felt there were always things, regardless of the “-ism”, which were non-sense or vague or unnecessarily complex or some combination of these.

In previous versions of this book, I wrote in more detail on these nonsensical things. But I decided this is quite an useless spending of my time and effort and deleted it from the book. Basically, because if I will do critique them, even if I’m directionally right in my critique, it will be useless and vague unless I’m an expert on the -ism I critique.

As of my current thoughts, I think what makes me reject academic or social definitions is that they do not clearly state from the beginning that they are actually analyzing a spectrum. And most of them present themselves as an independent, completely different approach from one another.

They are not. Most of the -isms are not fundamentally different from one another, they just differ in gray areas, and then they invent some anti-natural axioms to justify their individuality when some clever argumentation against its individuality is presented.

Later, as the discussion goes on and on, these anti-natural axioms are used over and over again, confusing everything and making all an intellectual mess, an honest one, yet a mess.  Leading to books of hundreds and hundreds of pages to avoid admitting that they are actually  not that unique.

It kind of feels natural and ergonomic though. If someone married to an -ism admits all of this, they would have to think so much again and untangle the mess. That is a lot of effort. Or even worse, destroy everything and start from 0, even more effort.

However, I encourage you to learn more about them on your own. Even if from time to time they all argue stuff with anti-natural statements, that does not take away that there is some useful element of truth to extract from each one of them. Furthermore it is a nice mental exercise to be exposed to other people’s framing ideas.

So please do not think the following definitions represent the ideologies as per current academic or social consensus. They are just a part of what people imply when naming them. The ideologies have way larger and more nuanced definitions in other contexts. Depending on who you ask even, some definitions change. I hate that, it is confusing, so to not be confused, I made my own, which funnily enough just creates another definition to confuse others.

My definitions were crafted trying to extract the element of truth, trying to logically deduce what all the definitions had in common, those defining traits which are actually useful and clear for the analysis of the problem.

The following, as said, is just the useful part of them when analyzing the resource management dilemma of human societies, a.k.a. economics.

I will define them from a “capability of arranging resources through money” point of view. This means who can or can not manage resources with money.

Say no more here they are:

- Anarchism: an anarchist society does not have a State, understood as a body with the monopolistic use of violence to enforce a law. There might or might not be public or private money. And the capability of using it is limited by rules agreed in the group instead of laws enforced by a State.

- Libertarianism: a libertarian society is the next centralization step from an anarchist society. In a libertarian society there is public money yet this is kept to the minimum amount required to fund a public army that forces people to abide the law. People have private money and can spend it to organize resources as long as they do not break the law. And the law is minimal, in the sense that it conflicts with the lesser intensity possible with the population desires and needs.

- Socialism: a socialist society is the next centralization step. If there is public money and it is used for creating more public services rather than just an army to enforce the law, that defines socialism. As in libertarianism, people still have private money which they can spend to organize any resource as long as they do not break the law. If the law is not minimal that also defines socialism.

- Communism: a communist society has no private money. Indeed it has no money at all. All power resides in the government who organizes resources with the power of its own authority. Government says, people obey, resources get moved.

You can visually think of all this text as follows:


Let me now define clearly a key term I used defining libertarianism: minimal law. As said, it is a penal code (set of laws) that conflicts with the lesser intensity possible with the population’s desires and needs. That intensity is defined by the number of constrains a law defines and the number of desires and needs that are actually suppressed inside a population due to those constrains. As we will understand soon, this is an impossible measurement as per our current capabilities, but this is its definition.

For the sake of clarity, here are the logic gates that define the -isms, if you are not a computer scientist I encourage you to research what this means:

notState = anarchim

State AND publicMoneyOnlyInArmy AND MinimalLaw = libertarianism

State AND (notPublicMoneyOnlyInArmy OR NotMinimalLaw) = Socialism

State AND noMoneyOnlyStateCommands = Communism

I will finish the beginning of this chapter with a bet. Then, while exploring the core problems of distributing resources, you will understand the reasons behind this bet and why it is not something assured, but a bet.

The bet:

If people become Cheerful, societies will become libertarian and socialism or any unnecessary centralization of power will eventually disappear.

After this long we finally understand how happiness works and we can conclude that for an individual to be happy it needs to: have enough money, relationships and health to be entertained plus basic biological survival needs covered and enough opportunities to pursue all of these things it might be lacking.

Thanks to all the technological advancement a lot of us can be less worried about the survival part. But what about the rest? How can we organize society so everyone can try to be happy and succeed in their mission?

Well, it’s all statistics and it might be, sometimes, quite impossible.

5.1.- The 2 core problems when distributing resources and the implications of Cheerfulism, AI and blockchain on them.

5.1.2.- The first core problem: too much variables.

There are multiple variables affecting this problem in this system. For example some variables are how many resources we consume and how many each of us needs to satisfy our desires.

Consider the current estimated global population: with over 8 billion individuals (8.000.000.000 = 8 * 10^9), each person with its unique desires and needs, the number of variables quickly becomes of astronomical magnitude. If we, very conservatively, estimate that each person has at least one unique desire, we're already dealing with 16 billion variables. Furthermore, these desires can change at varying rates, adding another layer of complexity.

So we got ourselves 8 * (10^9) humans, times 8 * (10^9) desires-at-least * some-rate-of-change. This is at least 64 * (10^18) variables, and we are being very conservative.

There are a lot of variables that influence needs and desires, merely by generally defining them we already get such enormous numbers. This is the first core issue on organizing resources in our societies, its mere complexity due to the amount of variables involved.

How do we get rid of this issue, in other words, how do we solve this problem. Or at least, how do we minimize its negative impacts?

In order to ease our initial understanding about the problem of efficient resource management, let’s start assuming that there are enough resources in the first place to keep us all alive, we will revisit this assumption, this fixed variable, later.

Now we know that our brains can solve problems by breaking them down, by using the fixed-variable resolution technique, processing definitions from experiencing reality and playing around using logic around those definitions to react. We are multiple of these beings playing a ping pong information game with one another. We might shoot the ball in our turn faster or slower, with a special effect or not, and then the other will react to our actions, after processing himself the information.

In recent history, we became astonishingly good at this. Humans have invented lots of technologies that made this process faster.

With engines we got physically faster, and our messengers could transport information faster. Then, after intellectually taming the flow of electrons, electricity, and after a good bunch of years of cleverness, we made them become our main messengers. Then, we wired the whole world with fancy metals, rails for electrons, we encoded meaning in them and unlocked the quickest highway of information flow, a highway with a speed limit close to the speed of light, the internet.

Fast forward more decades and we got ourselves more advancements in the incredibly creative and fancy ways we make these electrons dance, getting ourselves AI. Or for the technical people reading this, Large Language Models (LLMs).

And here I stop with this fancy, quite poetic description on how humans have developed faster ways of transmitting and processing information. Which ultimately, at the deepest base of our natural workings, it is the way in which we take decisions and decide how to manage the resources.

We have way better technology, therefore we can make good, and bad decisions, faster. But, could we solely rely on technology?

Let’s tackle the latest of technologies, AI. Because AI is what mostly resembles a brain and what ultimately can actually be used to take decisions. Internet is just the highway over which we drive electrons to communicate decisions to each other, transports like cars and planes are another type of information highway too, but AI is the only groundbreaking innovation that can arrange information in such a way that describes a decision.

Therefore, it is not that crazy to ask ourselves, can we delegate all our resource managements to AI? Here are my conclusions.

Modern AI, even the most advanced models, are not solely defined by their neuron count. The quality and quantity of data they're trained on are crucial too. While it's true that the largest AI models a of writing this have around the order of 175 * (10^12) parameters, this doesn't directly correlate to perfectly managing 1 parameter to 1 human desire or human life or societal structure. Even in that unreal super powerful case of 1 parameter to 1 need correlation, we would still be short as the number of parameters must increase by:

(minimum number of variables) – (current number of parameters) = (parameters we still need for an unreal and conservative scenario)

(64*10^18) – (175*10^12) = 6.4 * (10^19), a.k.a. still a lot even while being incredibly optimistic and simplistic.

Furthermore, as said, AI is not just about the number of neurons and parameters, it’s about quantity and quality of data too. So we must take into account that historically, we've struggled to yet fully solve the following challenges at global scales: hunger, sustainable happiness and wars. Training an AI with our current data might result in a model that inherits our limitations and biases. Thus completely relying on AI to manage our society is astronomically far from the current capabilities.

The problem is too big to just face it with current technologies.

But as explained in Chapter 3… All complex systems can be manged by humans when broken down in smaller parts. So, how do we break down such a big problem?

Well, as always, by defining fixed variables, definitions that create rules, instructions that lead to the establishment of an order, a protocol, an algorithm that we later execute. The most famous of them have been mentioned in earlier sections: anarchism, libertarianism, socialism, communism.

Theoretically, libertarianism solves the resource management problem pretty gracefully and that is the main problem that socialism and communism have, they are not as graceful as libertarianism. What do I mean by graceful? I will explain later.

Theoretically, in the realm of ideas, by limits on their design, these 2 more centralized protocols will never be as efficient as libertarianism at global scales or at relatively medium and big scales. I will explain later.

However, what about in the realm of application? In that case, our current history seems to point in this direction too. In recent history societies that followed these more centralized protocols compared to those societies that followed more decentralized ones have obtained more poverty, or less wealth.

But why? Is this a rule? Are we in some historically biased context?

Let’s keep analyzing more concepts to understand all of this.

5.1.2.2.- How new technologies will help to deal with the first core problem of too much variables.

Regardless of the resource management protocol of choice, the technologies mentioned so far will be key on each and everyone’s future. As they are key to efficient information management which is ultimately what resource allocation is all about.

These will be, and already are, their influences:

- Internet: faster and cheaper access to information.

- AI: helps to search for information and digest (understand) it very rapidly due to its incredibly high and fast capabilities of analyzing big chunks of data.

- CDNs (Consensus-based database networks, popularly known as blockchains): all the recent cryptography advancements like zero-knowledge cryptography, networks and protocols that this technique is using, creating, and improving, will and currently allow humans to force to be private whatever data they need, and force to be public whatever data should be. This data is also unalterable thus creates promises that, if ever broken, will immediately be detected. Some promises are even unbreakable. All this curiously leads to more trust on different parties cooperating or associating with each other, precisely because of the minimization, or disappearance, of trust-needing factors. A revolution in how sophisticated is our trust, which is executed via showing or hiding information.

These technologies have and will have these roles but, which resource management protocol will prevail? I’ve tried to answer this question but it is impossible to, at least for me, 100% assure which protocol will be the predominating one in future Cheerful societies. Why can’t I? Too much variables. I think that Cheerful individuals will be able to adapt and change the protocol of choice according to their context along history. Yet if I had to bet on one, as said before, I tend to believe that libertarian Cheerful societies will prevail.

Regardless of the protocol, one thing is clear. We have to be able to handle more variables more efficiently, with the help of machines and in our own. That is the way to the most brilliant solution to the resource management dilemma, whether that ends up being anarchist or communist. Cheerfulism promotes a factor essential for this scenario, the maximization of intelligence.

We can’t precisely know what the future looks like, yet what we can do for sure is get more intelligent with the engineers’ way of thinking and also develop our technology to improve even more our variable handling capabilities.

Then, regardless of who ends up holding the power to distribute resources and punish actions, they will do it way more intelligently than if technology was not as advanced. And way more intelligently than if they did not analyze systems as well as an engineer.

5.1.5.- The second core problem: parasitism behavior, abuse.

Another key thing to notice is that no matter which system you chose, someone can take advantage of others in one way or another. Abusing their ignorance or intelligence like parasites that take advantages of other bodies to survive. Luckily, us humans, are not parasites because we don’t ultimately depend on parasitism to survive. We can learn to change our lifestyle to a sustainable one using cooperation instead of parasitism. That is the second core problem, parasitism, abuse.

You might be thinking about it, and indeed, this can be seen as a consequence of the first core problem. As there are too much variables, the inefficiencies of some humans solving them can be exploited by others.

So yeah, people can take advantage of others. The real question is not only how to arrange the value and manage resources but also how to manage a key resource, each one’s own intelligence.

So how do you avoid abuse? Shortly and generally for now, the keys for optimizing happiness and cooperation, thus reducing abuse, are intelligence, empathy, and efficiency.

The key is finding an efficient path to maximize change using intelligence. While minimizing trauma using empathy towards others and oneself.

Trauma is caused by an unexpected change made too quick. This can be seen as a consequence of some sort of abuse. But what is abuse really? Let’s delve deeper on abuse so we can understand better how to minimize it.

5.1.5.1.- When abuse happens, symptoms of a sick society.

Let’s “assert“ something that might trigger some of you: socialism is a symptom of a sick society. Later I will proof this wrong but bear with me.

What do I mean by sick society? I mean by it a society whose individuals have too much of some of these negative traits:

- Laziness.
- Weakness.
- Dumbness.
- Ignorance.
- “Un-empathetic”: lack of empathy.
- Egoism.

These 6 traits create the reasons for when and why a human can abuse another, thus creating a potential need for a policeman (a State) to regulate the humans’ lives.

I define abuse as:

Purposefully harming another being to benefit yourself.

This is how abuse emerges from these traits:

- A lazy human won’t work and would like the work to be done for them by others: a boss in a small business that forces workers to work more, or a lazy person who doesn’t wanna work and wanna live from public aid and taxes. In both abuses, a third party can (and probably will) appear to decide who gets punished.

- A weak human is someone who is not able to physically carry out a task. Some people are not just lazy but they really can’t do stuff. Like safely lifting 65kg in some construction working area. Weak humans can not defend themselves physically from less weak humans, thus allowing someone else to abuse them by physical threats or actions.

- A dumb human is a human that, due to biological reasons, is unable to be over the average intelligence. It is easier for these people to fall into scams or be fooled. In any way, this trait also leads to people messing around with each others’ lives and probably requiring a third party with power to decide who is not abused.

- An ignorant is different from someone dumb in the sense that ignorance has a solution, studying and thinking. And the problem with ignorance, again as an example, is that it can lead to getting scammed. Thus another abuse that can require a third party deciding who is punished. In this book, I will use the word ignorant and stupid as synonyms for someone who has not studied enough.

- An un-empathetic individual is the one who can’t understand how other people think and feel situations. Thus the definition of empathy is someone who is capable of understanding how people think and feel situations. Notice that for helping others you need to be aware of their situation, that is why the more you know each other the easier for a more effective empathy to arise. Then, un-empathetic individuals, as they don’t know what the other considers harmful or wants (good and evil), they can accidentally end up abusing with their actions.

- An egoistic individual is the one who sees the opportunities of abuse and takes advantage of them instead of just doing nothing or, if possible, helping the victim to become better and avoid potential future abuses. This differs from un-empathy in that un-empathetic individuals can not discern they are creating an abuse, yet egoistic individuals are aware and chose to abuse or let others be abused.

The less abuse the more efficient (better if you please) a society will tend to be. The point can be seen way clearer if we reduced the size of a society to 3 people.

Let’s say 2 citizens and 1 policeman. Clearly and ideally, if instead of 2 citizens producing and a policeman making surveillance, we had the 3 of them working together without dispute, we could optimize and increase the amount and variety of output we produce so as to make us happy.

Thus I must conclude we shouldn’t be proud of needing a State (the policeman) even though it is necessary. We must aim to have citizens comfortable with the smallest State possible.

Because that will mean they fear as less as possible abuse from their neighbors. Thus then they can dedicate their time to a productive seek and maintenance of happiness. And, the need for less policemen will mean that those previous policemen are now citizens also in the seek of productive happiness-generating activities.

Socialism is necessary, we must not reject it for now, but we should not be proud of needing it. We should aim to safely get rid of it.

As a metaphor/parallelism, socialism is like a pill to lower down the blood pressure of fat people. Sure it can help to mitigate the pain for some time but the underlying cause of the problem won’t disappear, the overweight, and pain will happen again. What we should do instead is not taking pills, but rather slowly leaving them behind as we get a more healthy life that allows us to function while working on getting a healthy weight.

We should not reject socialism for now, sometimes the quickness of centralization can help you promote a quick advancement in certain essential productive areas, furthermore, if there is people abusing others they should be stopped somehow, but we should be aware that the real and prosperous solution comes through education, studying and empathy. Rather than regulating which eventually means wasting resources with avoidable policemen, reflecting the existence of societal conflict and distrust. Wether this conflict is internal or external with other nations.

Therefore, in more or less direct ways, socialism is a symptom of abuse, the only exception I can think of, proving wrong the above statement as always true, is the already mentioned case where a centralize command requires quick action for an essential resource management.

Summing all up, abuse is the second core problem: laziness, weakness, ignorance, dumbness, lack of empathy and egoism allow abuse to happen. These are the 6 fundamental sources of abuse which I’ve derived from logical principles.

First, the clear distinction between capability of acting and actually acting. Someone can be dumb and literally not be able to solve a problem, or someone can be intelligent enough yet just ignorant. Thus these 6 traits can bee seen as 3 pairs of action quality and capability of action:

- (Quality of action, Capability of action)
1.- (Ignorance, Dumbness)
2.- (Egoism, Un-empathy)
3.- (Laziness, Weakness)

And these 3 pairs have also been logically derived from the 3 parts of problem solving. First realizing you have a problem (empathy’s pair), then using intelligence (ignorance’s pair) and muscle to solve it (weakness’ pair).

Thus I confidently assert any other abuse related adjective or action can be decomposed and explained from all these 6 traits. Thus to solve all abuse, we must actually manage properly these 6 traits.

We can also understand this issue from the reversed perspective: A lack of intelligence fails to combat ignorance, a lack of drive for efficiency, which arises from intelligence, allows laziness and egoism to reduce productivity, and a lack of empathy makes it harder to prevent the exploitation of the dumb and weak.
This is why I wrote earlier:

The key is finding an efficient path to maximize (efficiency so not laziness) positive change using intelligence (minimizing ignorance) while minimizing trauma (abuse) using empathy towards others and oneself. (to avoid egoism and respect, even help, the dumb and weak)

With all explained in this section, I have almost all ready so you understand the bet I made at the beginning of the chapter. However, I still need to write another section. Let’s visit it.

5.1.1.- The quickest way to coordinate desires and needs: money and market prices.

The last concepts to understand before clarifying my initial bet are money and prices.

Money is essentially a tool for coordinating social agreement on how valuable things are.

Before money there was trade of assets, 2 sheep for 20 apples, 1 wooden spoon for 3kg of wheat etc etc. As humans learned to use resources more efficiently and in greater abundance, the size of societies grew. And as we have seen, the complexity of the social matters grew even faster.

It started to no longer be a pragmatic thing to execute trades on very specific asset pairs, like sheep per apples, wheat per sword etc To do barter. Thus, we needed an abstract way to measure value in order to estimate as best as possible who should do what and for how long.

We needed a single thing to pair with any product or service to simplify the graph of possible trades and make it more interconnected. That thing was money. Therefore we would get the following pairs: (sheep, currency), (apples, currency), (sword, currency) etc This way, all pairs become comparable, as they share an element, currency, associated by definition with the other element in the pair.

Another factor that lead to the invention of money was the early monopoly of violence kings were. Some of them started giving away signed papers saying stuff like: To whoever holds this the king will grant him 20kg of wheat in the future. Or any other useful material. And then people started exchanging them trusting the king will be honest about that claim or use its force to make it true.

There are multiple historical reasons related to our social dynamics that lead us to use this abstract measurement unit of value we call money. Research on your own if you want more details on what actually came first etc.

The historical reasons are not that relevant. What is truly relevant is to understand intuitively and exactly why money is useful and how it makes trading easier. Which is the underlying reason why we did not come back to the old barter.

Money is ultimately used for that: a tool for generating a socially agreed unit for value. Which can be used to judge quickly wether to make a trade or not.

Without money, if I need apples, and the one who needs apples wanted a a sheep, but I don’t have a sheep yet I have an iron spoon. I could not get apples unless I find someone willing to change a sheep for an iron spoon. Because the apple seller does not care at all about an iron spoon, so somehow I need to get what he wants, a sheep. Therefore, if I only have an iron spoon, I must find someone willing to trade the pair of an iron spoon for a sheep.

This is clunky, even if there was someone who wants my iron spoon, if he has no sheep I do not care because I need sheep for my apples.

It was a very inefficient way of functioning. You required a very specific chain of desires to appear in order to get what you want. A chain of linked desires that not always appeared.

However with money, once we all agree to use it, I only have to worry about the abstract number the guy selling apples wants because we all accept similar compatible pairs.

If you are more of a visual person, think of it like said before, the asset pairs are nodes in a graph, and the edges only appear if the pairs coincide in 1 element, wherever there is a connection we call that a trade, a barter some will call it. This creates a complete graph, all nodes are suddenly connected and we all have a common barter element, currency.

And now, instead of only being capable of selling my iron spoon to someone with sheep, I can sell it to anyone who wants it. So, if I need 10 units of money for the apples, I will try to sell the iron spoon to anyone for that amount of money. And as I know the apple’s vendor also accepts money. The likelihood of chaining our needs to make the trade is way larger.

One because I now am sure the vendor will accept it, and second, because the amount of people I can sell whatever product I want to sell, in this case it was an iron spoon, has increased dramatically as now the very limiting requirement of needing a sheep has been deleted.

Now, if the sheep seller sells it at 10 units of value, the apple vendor will only accept selling its apples at at least 10 units, because he wants to later buy the sheep. Therefore, he puts the price of 10 to the apples. And now, I do not need to know anything at all about his desires, or the prices of his desires, I just need to focus on gathering 10 units.

Or maybe even less, if I manage to bargain. Or… if there are other apple vendors that can sell it cheaper, because their needs and desires are less expensive than the apple vendor which needs sheep. This is what it is is usually known as the offer side. Me wanting apples is the demand side.

Money translates our desires and needs to the same language so we can trade more efficiently. Before you could only get apples if you spoke the sheep owner language. Now, you just need to speak money so you communicate and agree with the apple seller.

This creates other benefits like, before money, the apple seller can only sell apples to a very limited amount of people who had what he needs or desires. Now it can sell it to anyone because he knows that what he will receive will be accepted by others who have the capability to satisfy his needs or desires.

Because we all now speak the same language for describing value, communication is more useful and we are able to do more stuff with each other.

As you might have seen, the amount of money which we agree to sell a product or service is called the price. In other words, the value with which the offer and demand sides agree upon.

And the number at which that a trade for a product or service is made on a place where lots of people participate, it is called the market price. Which along history has been measured with different techniques and technologies and used as a reference when deciding for how much to sell or buy something.

Eventually, because it made things more comfortable, instead of agreeing in each trade about a price, we created specific locations where people met to trade and determine prices: the  exchanges.

They gathered very useful numbers that measured the overall social unit of value something was worth based on lots of offers and demands.

Earlier there was literally a venue for it, but after the invention of the internet, you can participate in exchanges that are almost anywhere, as long as you are legally allowed to, that became the only limitation.

And now, the velocity of measurements of how worthy things are is a quick as the speed of electricity on the internet, almost the speed of light.

We created the fastest way to trade and agree on social coordination of labor and effort based on what moves us to do that precise labor and effort, value.

We will see why this knowledge is important in a bit.

But before finishing this section I mut warn that price being an agreement is an ideal. In real life coercion can also play a role, people can abuse each other. For example in the monopolies of essential resources.

Do not fall into the incoherence of thinking market prices are perfect in the sense of a beautiful world where everyone agreed. Some of them are clearly influenced by abusive behavior like forced child labor, tariffs to make people in other nations less profitable etc

The market is not perfect in the sense of no abuse, but in the sense of minimal abuse given power constrains. As a small note, the free market does not exist, because it is made by humans. And humans are not free, we are limited by and limit the society that we live in. The market might be free only in the sense that, specially given current technological advancement, everyone has a voice.

However, some people can scream way louder, some can buy speakers and megaphones, and others only have their voice. Even if we all can participate, specially thanks to CDNs, we will all be constrained by our traits, our capabilities, our power to do things.

In that sense, the market is not free. And this is vital to remember, specially for people like me with libertarian tendencies, because if we ignore it, we will be ignoring a clear source of abuse we should aim to minimize.

5.1.4.- Clarifying my bet.

Remember the bet at the beginning of section 5.2? Well now I can finally complete and display all the reasoning that lead me to that conclusion.

Why libertarianism?

Because, by definition, it is the one who represents a society where abuse is the minimal.

A libertarian society has minimal laws as there is minimal need for regulation, this is because the static and dynamic nature of humans is aligned as much as possible. This just means, that if you or a group of people want to do something due to your natural needs and desires, which you will perceive as good, the also needed static reference of human nature will not prohibit it.

Under the assumption that not having a State is impossible, if the paragraph above is given, this reaches our initial goal as realistically as possible: satisfy unlimited desires with limited resources.

As said, this is because the static part, the law, must not get in the way of the dynamic part that produces our needs and desires.

Therefore, the minimization of abuse is the most effective way to reach the goal. As abuse is harming (doing bad) to others to benefit yourself (receiving good). If we aim for everyone to satisfy their needs and desires (good), that must only come from no abuse, however that is unrealistically unlikely, therefore, the only realistic way is, the minimization of abuse.

As we can not control the dynamic influences due to too much variables, we can only manage them better with the maximization of intelligence, the only thing left to do after that is tackling the static part so it gets as less as possible in the way.

For that there are 2 options:

1.- Have the minimal law.
2.- Have a law for every single possibility, present and future, of desires and needs clashing.

Due to too much variables and our limitations in information processing capabilities that we have already explored, the second one is impossible. And, as a brief spoiler, this is why communism is impossible too, but I will explain this later.

Therefore, a requisite to satisfy as efficiently as possible unlimited desires with limited resources being honest to human nature is to have minimal law. In a way, minimize the “size of the State”. Understood as the amount of interference it produces in the private flow of money.

For these reasons I think libertarianism will be the end result if societies become Cheerful.

However, we might never know if we reached libertarianism, because as seen, measuring the intensity of law is currently impossible due to too much variables. Precisely too because of that I used the word bet. We, as of now, can not agree if we reached libertarianism, however, that does not obstruct the fact that we can and we should use it as a guide and an aim.

Why not socialism?

The abuse sources will be reduced to its unavoidable minimum by Cheerful individuals who are efficient due to having maximized intelligence and are empathetic due to optimizing and being gathered around the natural goal of happiness.

Phrasing it in socialist terms: Cheerful individuals will make the abuse by the capitalist class to the working class as minimum as possible, perhaps, even none sometimes. Obliterating the root cause that originated socialism in the first place.

Nevertheless Cheerful individuals do not reject socialism.

First because Cheerfulism is agnostic to any protocol of resource management as it is based on the purest principles that determine human happiness. Principles that, given survival, they guide individuals, yet as a group, to to their optimal happiness, whether that ends up implying more or less freedom for them, more or less State intervention.

Second. Even though Cheerfulism is not really against socialism and, if it is needed, it will be used by Cheerful people, I do think in the long therm Cheerfulism will minimize to its minimum all abuse sources making socialism a residual phenomena. Deleting as much as possible the reasons for a State and socialism to exist in the first place. But that I the catch, as much as possible, it might be that the minimum size is not limited to juts a State in charge of controlling the army. This is why the statement was a bet.

I think that with Cheerful individuals socialism is not a logical conclusion in the long-term yet it can make sense to use it during a transition at short and medium terms.

Maybe socialism can be understood as a natural part of human nature, arising as a counter-force to the double-edge sword of libertarianism with its freedom for some but not really for others. Some kind of natural phenomena to balance rapid spread of bad abusive actions taken under the high speeds of libertarian methodologies, at the speeds of the “free” market.

Another natural cause where socialism can arise from is the fact that not everyone is intelligent enough to handle certain amounts of freedom. Thus it appears as a way of guidance where a few rule over others who can’t rule themselves.

I think these two causes are actually tied together. The fast pace of change that sometimes happens leads to some people to be left behind and unable to adapt as fast to that change. Thus then requiring this third party guidance. At the same time due to slow adaptation, some faster people might abuse them fostering the need for State intervention, hell, even the State can be the abusive one, as they are no more and no less than just other humans.

It is a natural rule of humans, if you get freedom but abuse it too much, someone or some people will get you controlled right after. This works very well inside one nation but…

Another reason for socialism to exist is the lack of a world government. In the real world, a nation is surrounded by lots of other diverse nations with diverse protocols. If two nations have similar needs and desires yet the market only has room for one, then it feels natural that, under a context without a monopoly of violence enforcing any law, the one who plays dirty wins. And the game becomes one of trust, where no abuse will be made (for example tariffs) and no socialism will be required, as long as you trust the other is being honest. However, due to too much variables, you can never be sure if the other will keep being trust worthy forever, therefore it makes sense to cheat a bit to make sure you never suddenly find yourself being fooled. These are the same dynamics of the security dilemma of armies explained in the previous chapter.

As of nowadays society, I think most of us are not ready to get rid of socialism for multiple reasons.

Just to name one, in the first 20 years of the 21st century the feeling of loneliness is rising a lot according to studies and personal groups’ experiences. If people feel lonely how are they gonna be able to coordinate and communicate as friends and neighbors?

Additionally lack of intelligence arising from intellectual laziness is the other reason. Which combined with loneliness are the essential reasons for why I think nowadays people need and crave socialism. Yet they should aim to transition away from it.

Summing up my bet and to conclude the previously asked question of: why not socialism?.  Because at its deepest core, the main reasons of it existence stem from the usage of abusive traits, wether from the citizens towards themselves, from the State towards them or from a nation to another.

That is why, even if it will be useful and necessary in certain contexts, I do not think we should aim for socialism as the guide and why I think, eventually, Cheerful societies will be libertarian.

There is one more reason against socialism. Which is that public companies tend to be less efficient than private ones.

The fundamental reason for this is because public companies do not play by the same rules as private ones. The management of them depends more directly on the government. And, governments are only accountable for their actions every time there are elections. In some cases, if there are not elections, then, every time there are significant revolts.

This process of feedback about abusive behavior that people demand to be corrected is slower than in the private market. Therefore, the quality of the products it tends to create depends a lot on how dynamic and how linked to the consumer the law creation mechanics are. This is not a resource management dilemma anymore but also a power dynamics one.

Yet, even in the most democratic and dynamic law creation system, its adaptation won’t be as fast as the price mechanism private markets have. Because people can not vote on everything and every time a public company makes a decision, this is because our cognitive abilities are limited and we can not pay attention to every detail of every public actions ever time. Therefore, even in the most realistic democratic protocol, the efficiency will always be smaller than the efficiency of price. Which as seen in a previous section, it is a very simple tool to use and to understand which signals and coordinates agreements of needs and desires really fast.

We all can and adjust needs, preferences and demands based on pries very quick. But we can not do the same based on a decent amount of micro-management decisions every public company makes. For this reason, socialism is always less efficient that libertarianism.

And, even if we sometimes need it for the reasons explained, we should aim not to need it. We should internalize it as a temporary solution and not the final goal.

Why not anarchism?

Abuse is intrinsic to human kind. And from time to time, if there is no superior statist force, a bunch of humans with the abuse trait will be born and will organize to create the need for a centralized predominant mafia (State), agreed or not by the people.

This is the conclusion we can take looking at history so far. Humans always end up having extreme discrepancies with each other and can not in practice just not to abuse too much in order to not need a State. As a curious thought, if someone manages to proof that abusive tendencies in society follow a power law, an ever lasting anarchism would be proven impossible.

All this may eventually arise from the complexity of our societies escalating so quickly. Which would make the chances of us never having a strong argument with each other, to the point of frequent physical violence, unrealistically low.

So, unless there is a way to delete this trait from humans never be born, because of futuristic advanced genetic modifications, I do not think anarchism will really prevail. Even in that case, should we? What if the impossibility of zero abuse is a core trait that made us survive all this time and then if we delete it we get extinguished? What if small abuses are a natural and needed signal used to inform others the limits of your preferences and self balance the group to its ever dynamic change of needs and desires, like personal desires or new individuals born, so to make it adaptive and responsive, evolve?

The only way to safely reach anarchism, maybe, just maybe, is making the education process of new humans so perfect that the likelihood of an abusive group being created is negligible. Still, I think we have a long way to go to get there too and lots of intermediate steps must be taken to slowly transition there.

So, as of today, from time to time, these perfect storm of abusive conditions will emerge from new or probably already existing humans. And it will do so in such an amount that requires the need for a State.

I think the most “anarchist” power dynamics system we can aim for with current technology is, do not worry if you do not understand some technical terms, looks something like:

Any new law and modification must be voted by everyone, yet decision making is automated by AI based on each citizen’s personal data.

All the data remains accessible but private in zero-knowledge cryptography based blockchains with a public transparent and decentralized global one where final decisions are settled and where people submit their votes. Similar to what Ethereum is today. Anyone can opt-in and decide to vote for themselves instead of their personalized AI. Furthermore the personal data can be self-hosted instead of residing in the public selectively-private blockchain network.

All AIs will be connected to each other and suggest what to vote for based on the data, they will be able to coordinate through this private blockchains but not reveal private data of other citizens thanks to cheap fully homomorphic encryption mixed with zero-knowledge cryptography. The thing that the blockchain network of AIs will optimize for is happiness long term based on the personal input of each citizen about their desires and needs.

And, to help adapt to fast changing laws, an AI companion, with private data, goes always with you and warns you if you are going to do something that suddenly became illegal. To prevent sudden criminal acts, a delay between when laws become effective after a successful voting can also be implemented. However these details are more implementation specific nuances. The overall dynamic is above.

Eventually, the monopoly of violence, if even needed, will be no human, just robots that punish and monitor based on the laws voted by humans or their AIs. So, we will all be the violence, no monopoly technically, a free market and a very liquid democracy where everyone participates on everything.

During a necessary very slow transition period, in the State, there will be humans too, with their own AI companions as any other citizen has.

These are the blueprints on how I imagine the closest thing to anarchism we can aim for in the following century looks like.

Why not communism? 

Due to too much variables assigned to the little amounts of people who hold power. As explained, this is not necessarily a consequence, it is just the likely thing to happen given our current intelligence, technology and society’s sizes.

Furthermore, in a State completely managed by power and no money, the effective coordination of desires and needs becomes impossible. The people in the State would have to become infinitely capable barter machines, which is just impossible. Again, under our current technological limitations. However, it really looks like it will be like this for centuries.

Even if it was possible and suddenly we have that technology, our natural behavior of getting bored would eventually break it.
Imagine that a government manages to develop in secret this incredible tech and controls everyone with it, like a super-AI.

I would say that the natural flow of that scenario is that the humans in the State will eventually get bored of what they can do. As curiosity and killing boredom eventually with novelty, as explained long ago in the book, is intrinsic to all humans. The logical step to take for killing boredom is to give people more power so novel, more complex, different stuff can be created. Then this leads to a progressive decentralization of societies at the rhythm of the governors’ class boredom tolerance. Sooner or later ending up in libertarianism. Well, under this crazy technological advancement assumption, then, ending up in anarchism.

5.1.5.- How Cheerfulism minimizes abuse?

Here are the dynamics I hope Cheerfulism brings into the game of the minimization of abuse. In general, the two lines of action Cheerfulism propose minimize the 6 traits that lead to you being abused to the minimum, therefore, if everyone adopts it, they will be able to abuse from each other the realistic minimum.

The ways I which the two lines of actions reduce the abuse surface go as follows:

The process of maximizing intelligence requires not being lazy (1/6) due to the mental effort needed. This is because the dynamics of studying to maximize your intelligence require effort mechanics really similar to the ones of physical exercise. Therefore, if someone takes the habit of slowly maximizing its intelligence, slowly but surely, its laziness will become the minimal one.

This process further reduces your ignorance (2/6) and minimizes the harms your natural dumbness (3/6) can cause you. This is because by learning you naturally decrease your ignorance and therefore, you won’t be at you natural lower limit of dumbness.

Furthermore, the maximization of intelligence easens the way for you to understand yourself better, because yourself can be abstracted as a system. And knowing yourself only potentiates your ability to know others, which can increase your empathy (4/6) and reduce your egoism (5/6).

This is because, even if selfish, you will be more able to detect the intricacies and complexity of human relations and you will be able to realize faster the limits till which you can abuse without creating too much chaos. Therefore, the amount of abuse you will selfishly execute will be always controllable and not chaotic, the minimal realistic one.

Furthermore, the increase in empathy can even lead to selfless individuals who act without abuse too.

What is even more, I think as realistic because I lived it in my own flesh the following dynamic too: An increased intelligence creates a thirst for more complex goals, which, will require people to help you to achieve them. Because your imagination will be so potentiated that you will be no longer enough to literally make your dreams come true. Thus, even if you are a non-empathetic person, the sheer complexity of the goals that your brain will be able to design and desire will force you to cooperate with people. And the more you cooperate with people, the easier it gets for you to feel them as buddies and not as “others”. So you will not tend to take advantage of them that much.

Even if you try to abuse, because you are just one and the people are literally more than you, then you just can’t physically do it and your abuse will retaliate or just fail.

And, if for whatever reason you eventually manage to abuse and conflict arises from that, the happiness shared goal will promote calming down the waters thanks to the true existence of a shared relatable goal. And hopefully, if there was a time before the abuse when you actually got along with the people you abused, that can help even more to promote calming down the waters and solving the conflict.

The goal of happiness optimization does not only unite us all, but it also has great benefits for oneself. Seeking and doing things that make you happy create fulfilled, relaxed individuals, less prone to certain kinds of abuse. Laziness is the biggest risk of the goal of happiness, yet that is counterbalanced in Cheerfulism with the maximization of intelligence.

The maximization of intelligence and pursuit of optimal happiness, due to the imagination increase on each one of us, will likely lead to people who are aware of the importance of health and physical training, leading to a desire in them to be as healthy as possible in order to have more lifespan to fulfill their ambitious desires, or simply enough, have a better quality of life to enjoy their desires more and for longer. Reducing weakness (6/6).

It is obvious that if someone manages to be happy and healthy will enjoy a longer and better life than a drug addict. However, being happy and healthy is far way more difficult requiring way more effort than being a drug addict. That is why even in front of the obvious better choice, people still fall for addictions.

It makes more sense comparing it to physical limits, if you never needed to lift 100kg from the floor, why would you train for it? If you can not imagine a scenario you like where you will need it, you will never bother in starting a training. Same goes for happiness, if you never train your intelligence and later analyze all the different sources of happiness your body has and never analyze deeply how to combine them for more well-being, you will fall for destructive patterns more often.

I believe that human addictions do not disappear due to the lack of imagination and the lack of being taught how to use effort in a consistent and progressive manner. Which lead to weakness. Addictions may arise from lots of diverse causes, some of them uncontrollable, however, I believe that, if they do not disappear, is due to the factors mentioned. Which fortunately enough, are controllable in the extent they are teachable.

And the pursuit of the maximization of intelligence and optimization of happiness will lead to more creative people and less lazy ones that likely end up helping each other due to a share goal that makes them feel not as “the other”. Helping eventually to those who got addicted in very unfortunate circumstances.

However happiness, even if a shared goal, is subjective as different execution of patterns provide different amount of happiness to each one of us. So, how can that unite us?

Even though happiness producing patterns are subjective, we would still better understand each other emotions and motivations as we would have the same goal: feeling happy. Happiness is the deepest factor in our intrinsically subjective existence that can always spark empathy. It is not an assurance with zero risk, but the only realistic minimization of the risk.

Most of the people, when they see someone crying, they do not need to know anything else in order to feel worried about that person. They do not need to know why that person is crying, they do not need to know if that very same thing that made that person cry would make them cry. There is an instinctual empathetic mechanism that appears in people when they understand the emotion someone else behavior displays.

When someone cries and your survival is statistically granted, most people try to understand it by feeling sad about it, it is a cooperation instinct.

The same can be triggered with happiness. You do not need to understand what makes someone happy in order to understand how that person feels and trigger in you that human connection and spark for mutual understanding inside us. So, even if your goals for happiness might be incompatible, that mutual understanding based on a positive constructive feeling will lead to the minimal abuse possible, even zero, if you are intelligent enough to find a way in which your happiness do not clash. 

Clashes are not always avoidable. As mentioned earlier, human existence is an unavoidable tale of trial and error, no matter your philosophy. Risks will never be zero.

For example, a risk on the intelligence side, on the first stages of maximizing intelligence, when your goals and dreams are not too complex, individuals risk becoming arrogant.

Yet as intelligence increases and the individuals can catch sight of desires way bigger than themselves, that will lead to the requirement of cooperation instead of coercion, abuse. However there is a chance that driven by arrogance someone abuses another one to the point of even threatening their statistically granted survival with the argument of “I know better than you what you should do.”. As said, all are likelihoods.

In that case, if you chose to abuse and you get punished by the group, you should be able to learn the lesson of: you can only sustainably make what you desire as long as you cooperate and find common ground.

I think it is safe to apply all this small-group level logic to a national level logic. But I am unsure of the international landscape, the one required for world peace. This is because there is not such a thing as the World’s State (or World Government for the One Piece series fans).

This is why I dedicated a whole chapter on thinking about the feasibility of world peace even under the assumption of a Cheerful world. Risks are never zero, there is always a what if, Cheerfulism is all good and functional but to some extent. If somehow someone after being Cheerful successfully abuses repeatedly, a good old slap in the face is the only force that will make him stop. Without a monopoly on violence on international scenarios, will we be able to assure this happens in a non-chaotic way? We will explore this in another chapter.

Regardless of that, for the reasons explained and due to the great results of being Cheerful in  my life, I believe that it is the way to the best possible world. I say I believe because as said, I still can not confirm and guarantee it, it is all statistics. I can say the same with the wording “I think” in this way: I think that, in tendencies terms, for the reasons above, Cheerfulism will tend to the best possible world.

X.- Conclusion: Chapter-5 until 5.2.5.

As we have seen, the key to the resource management dilemma is to minimize abuse. And for that we must tackle the traits that conform it. We must improve ourselves by minimizing those traits.

The only non improvable factor of the ones mentioned is how dumb someone is, the other ones can be worked on. And even if dumbness can’t be improved, empathy can and more intelligent people will abuse less the dumb. You can also see this as eventually being less egoistic. 

Yet regarding empathy, some individuals seem to lack it, the so popularly called psychopaths. But these are a really tiny tiny portion of population. I’m talking in general terms here and the vast majority of us can improve significantly the factors involved, including empathy and excluding dumbness.

For all these reasons and all things mentioned in this chapter so far, regardless of the resource management protocol of choice: 

We all should aim to be as less ignorant as possible, as much empathetic as possible and as less lazy, weak and egoistic as possible.

5.2.6.- Interesting cases of statist resource management despite its implied abuse.

To reduce dogmatism, promote thinking, and spark curiosity, here I will highlight and think about some modern cases of statist resource management that caught my attention.

5.2.6.1.- Nordic countries, the happy socialists.

Have you ever heard of Nordic countries? They registered the highest levels of happiness for a while and they are not the most libertarian countries in the world, in fact, they are really socialist and have powerful States. So, is it really that socialism is a symptom of a sick society? Well, not necessarily as we saw.

I’ve already said what the real symptom is: abuse. Socialism implies a non-minimal amount of abuse. Wether from the State to the citizens or from neighbors who distrust each other.

Yet if that money is well spent, maybe even better than how you, as an individual, would spend it, and if laws don’t go against your desires, there shouldn’t really be any real problem. A very clear example is the Finnish educational system in the early 2000s, more on next chapter.

Socialism perse implies non-minimal abuse yet it does not incorporate more inefficiency than an individual by definition. As we deduced, it all depended on wether there is a feedback loop on the power dynamic protocol and of the quality of information processing that feedback loop generates.

Maybe Nordic countries, as they are relatively small, they are so to the point that citizens are very close to power and it better represents them. Generating more accountability, the kind of interaction that generates real feedback.

As you can see, I’m trying to make sense of it using the logic presented in the previous section of the chapter. Exploring a system’s sub-module from other system parts, seeking truth. Thinking like an engineer.

Also, who knows? Maybe if they were more libertarian they would be even happier? Maybe they are the perfect place to try the experiment, they are already happy with socialism, let’s see what a progressive liberalization through education can do? More on this in the next chapter.

5.2.6.2.-  Patents, an image of distrust.

The other day I also thought of an interesting case of distrust and lack of cooperation that might not be that obvious, patents.

They will always be by default problematic because you can’t control ideas, once you tell them to a bunch of people, specially nowadays with the ease of information flow, they are uncontrollable and if you try it to do so, you will eventually fail, waste energy or have conflict.

Energy spent in something impossible. I personally am against patents, first for this reason.

And second for the fact that, as all regulation, they represent distrust. They mean: You don’t trust people to be intelligent enough to incentivize properly the creative minds in their societies so you need to regulate it, to force it.

You regulate it because you think people will use those ideas without giving any or enough credit to the original thinker. And this is considered unfair, but is it?

Well fair and unfair eventually results on a good and bad dilemma, attaining myself to my definition of good and bad presented in previous chapters, I do think not rewarding original thinkers is bad. Because, why would they keep being original if it’s not rewarded? Sure a bunch of them will do it out of passion or pure necessity. But, if we want the maximum amount of originality, it will be brought by greater incentives. So the lack of thereof leads to a lack of innovation and creativity which is a less adaptive way of living, thus I deem it bad.

The copyright solution to this issue of losing incentives on creativity that patents are, is impossible to truly carry out because, as said, ideas can’t be controlled in this modern era. Thus we are wasting resources because we think we can not independently reward creativity.

Another reason on why we are wasting resources is that the amount of rewards patents grant to the inventors can’t never be the optimal one. Why? Too much variables due to the subjective nature of value.

How do you measure what is the fair money an inventor should receive? How do you measure how much good it did to the world so to get rewarded accordingly? That depends on how much it affected people's lives. But depending on the invention it can be very hard to measure. Like art.

Furthermore an invention might be super useful for 1 citizen and not as much for another, adding a non-constant value provided to each person, you see? Another big and complex variable that should be taken into account precisely but can’t, and thus won’t.

Okay but, how do we incentivize creativity in a decentralized way then? Donations, investors that re-invest in the brain that got the idea is the answer. For example businesses can re-invest giving X% of the profits to the inventor so that brain can keep thinking and using its proven creativity. Additionally, when buying something at the store we can have a, tip X% to the inventor option. The automation of this process, specially now with blockchain, is easier than ever before.

Will this really benefit more the inventors? Will they earn more and therefore get motivated to keep inventing? Well, that depends on how grateful people are and how much they can afford to donate. In a society of gratefulness and trust, we do not need to enforce.

I do not know if it is realistic, but if it were possible, it would certainly be more efficient.

The less patents are needed in a society the more you can really see that people communicate with each other and trust each other.

There might not be the strongest of correlations between this two variables as of today, obviously there are more factors influencing trust and quality of cooperation in a society. I’m just saying that: if the patents variable goes down, it will probably be because the cooperation metric is going up, maybe a lot maybe a little, but going up.

For now I will just encourage society members to, without the need of legal enforcement, reward  as much as you think you can and deserve creative minds that you deem of value for your life. How? Maybe setting aside a few hours every two months to research people worth funding. And then, sending them money via classic banks transfers or… with blockchain and cryptocurrencies that allow you to safely send value anywhere without any restriction in an instant.

Even better, as a nation or a State, allow inventors to register official cryptocurrency address and make it easy for anyone at buy time donate even fractions of a cent to an inventor if desired.

Let me highlight it again. I build my opinion of patents thinking like an engineer. I first defined the module of good and evil long ago, then I got a definition of what patents are, I started asking questions and answering them according to previous knowledge. And so on and so forth until I came up with an answer to a question I got: are patents useful?

I might not know all details about them, I might be wrong about any of the things here written, but I researched, I questioned, I discovered, I imagined, I linked information. All to have enough knowledge and create a solid answer that satisfies my need. Again, chapter 3, thinking like an engineer.

5.2.6.3.- Public funding of inefficient or even useless activities.

Another outstanding case is the lack of accountability for usefulness in public institutions.

Specially in my country Spain, yet visible worldwide is the amount of public workers who are doing a job that could be automated.

This is also abuse, as the tax payer has to actually do useful work for the community and earn the money as a symbol of that, yet the public worker can end up doing useless work, in the way of unnecessary expensive, or sometimes directly useless work. This is taking advantage of getting easy money, leading to conformity and laziness, abuse.

But, the issue has gotten so big that if we actually improve and reduce or delete useless jobs lots of people would become unemployed. And that is seen as bad. Mainly because people doubt that others are capable of adapting and finding new jobs.

Somehow, the abusers have more decision power on policy making and they keep their job. Some people understand this as a sort of bribery for voting and corruption: I give you an easy useless job and you vote me in exchange. I’m not saying this is the rule, yet this is just another form of abuse when inefficiency is tolerated in public institutions and services.

That is the key problem, people do tolerate others doing nothing and receiving stuff forcefully taken from themselves in exchange. They tolerate it to the point of extreme cases where that stuff taken from them leaves them with just enough money for their basic expenses and little more.

This tolerance comes from a position of weakness, mainly because of ignorance and dumbness, but way mainly ignorance I would say. Ignorance of economical knowledge, how taxes are spent and how better life could actually be for all if well spent. And, ignorance on how to coordinate crowds and effect pressure without the need for charismatic leaders.

Regardless of all of this, it is interesting to see this phenomena appearing over and over again around the globe. The ignorant is not only the tax payer, but also the politician making this useless jobs, also the people who work on them. If they are not ignorant, they are either dumb, lazy, egoistic or even un-empathetic. Still, no traits that are constantly present in thriving societies.

As we saw, all traits of abuse.

This is a really complex problem to solve, because we need ignorant people to learn and/or lazy people to work. Egoistic people usually do not change until someone punches them in the face, wether psychically or psychologically, yet that is violence and as it tends to chaos we should avoid this as much as realistically possible.

Laziness and ignorance can be worked out 100% peacefully though, and we should tackle the issue this way.

Likely via increasing awareness and study of tax budgeting while at the same time helping in training all the useless public workers to actually do useful jobs, wether totally related to what they were doing or not, should be enough.

Obviously, if you delete someone’s job, that person might have a really hard crash on his life, he might even have to move town etc etc And that will create strong opposing forces to deleting that job, and I’m not even mentioning the potential corrupted politicians forces.

So it is clear that a shock solution, unless in a critical situation of poverty, will not happen.

For example in Spain, at the very same time in which we start detecting uselessness we should start helping that public worker to get formation in some other area. Maybe we can pay them 6 years of his salary and psychological guidance, then just delete his job. Those 5 years should be enough to find a decent profession. I myself got in the top 1% earners of the country, by being a worker, in 2 years of learning slowly and 2 years of complete study and isolation. So it does not sound very far fetched.

Maybe my brain is exceptionally intelligent? I do not think so, I think that, for a normal person, in 6 years, they can get to my level of reasoning, maybe not earnings, but indeed reasoning. Precisely because I have hope in that that is doable it is because I’m writing this.

Furthermore, most people do not care nor need being at the top 1% of earners. So that just shortens the time needed to acquire useful skills and knowledge.

Mix all this with deleting employing taxes and restrictions to create a more dynamic job market to absorb all these people who just got out of job and you can have this problem solved.

Obviously there are more questions to answer to make this plan. I’m just laying out the direction. Because solving this specific problem is not the aim of this book, the aim of this book is to teach people the attitude, philosophy, to build utopias.

And obviously enough, this could have been done 6 years ago and that would be it. Problem solved by now, so it is really not an issue of not knowing how to solve it, but rather an attitude issue of people who are too deep in their ignorance, laziness and egoism to even try solving it.

As mentioned all along, every country has a very specific and unique situation, but I think we all share that, we are just not Cheerful enough.

Our thirst for intelligence should be higher, our love for happiness too. Right now we have repulsion to learning and a toxic relationship with happiness via too much drug consumption and systematic creativity killing environments, in public and private situations.

By promoting learning and learning to learn we not only help tax payers to pay less or to have what they pay to be spent well, but we also help all the useless workers to get a useful job suffering way less on the process. Because then they will be used to learn, to adapt.

It is like human calculators when accounting software was invented. They had to re-invent themselves, maybe by learning law and learning to use the new software so they can become accountants and still be useful for their peers. Or maybe completely changing to another job somewhere else.

Oh, and regarding the solution for solving those useless workers who are egoistic humans, which are likely only fixable with a slap on their face so they learn respect. I think someone intelligent enough realizes this is not the best solution, it is just better to educate people peacefully and that is it. The mass of egoist should slowly decrease out of pure shame when the main culture just points at them without insulting, even if not punishing them physically.

As explained in the chapter of power dynamics, there are lots of ways to punish someone who is truly evil without physical violence. And as said, if someone did too much violence, he will likely just get slapped. Cheerful people are just the best of the enemies, and allies.

Anyway I wanted to end the chapter with this example of abuse in our societies as a glare of hope and clear indicator on how I imagine Cheerful individuals can change the world.

We do have the means to solve lots of problems, now, as Spanish people would say:

Te faltan cojones.
(Translated: You are lacking testicles.)

Most of us need the balls to say: Yeah, I’m part of the problem, and it is going to be hard to change. But I will. For myself, or for my friends, or for my children, for my nation if you are patriotic, for whatever reason you feel motivated by. But please, be intelligent, adapt, change.

Slowly but surely, 1 problem at a time, or even more than one at a time, if we all get intelligent enough.

5.1.- Speculation and perception on the current state of things. Politicians, citizens, and their mistakes.

It's somewhat ironic that some politicians, equipped with enough intelligence to manipulate, convince or control people, often fail to recognize the long-term value of the common good. With this I’m talking about corruption, about when a politician gets corrupted.

Setting aside technicalities, I believe their mistakes lie on a personal level. In contrast to the average citizen’s problem, they aren't that much ignorant, they are rather hitting the limits of their intellect. At the end of the day, if they can't grasp the significance of a future where we all thrive, I must conclude I believe they are, indeed, dumb. Or at least dumb in that part of life.

I said I believe, I can’t affirm it because there's a chance that these politicians, despite their great amounts of intelligence, are fully aware and choose to act “short-sightedly” out of egoism driven malice, despite the common bad outcome. However, even if they are intelligent malicious individuals, they're still making dumb actions thus I see them as dumb. Acting with malice doesn’t disregard the fact that they are being or acting dumb by renouncing to a wealthier common future in exchange of some smaller personal present luxuries.

The average citizen of today has more luxuries than medieval kings, so what is the point on having, let say 10% of wealth, in a poor society when you could have 5% in a much much more wealthier society. The fact that that 5% can be bigger than the 10% is what makes me see them as dumb, or stupid and lazy, regardless of potential evilness.

I mut also state that I’m reasoning over the following assumption: A greater well-being arising from a less abused population leads to big enough economical growth over time.

To leave it as clear as numbers, if, let’s say your society produces 100 units of value, money. From those, as said 10% go to the corrupted politician. Therefore he gets 10. If he did not abuse he could have transitioned to a society where the total production increased to 1000, or just 201. And, in this not abused society, he gets less due to not being corrupted and taking that much, in this example that is 5%. Therefore he gets 5% of 1000, which is 50, or 5% of 201 which is 10.5.

Not only the society can get better at solving problems and reaching goals due to having more value, but the politician can even aspire to earn more by having even a lesser share. That is a realistic scenario, which, if reachable and not pursued, I will call you, objectively stupid and lazy, or objectively dumb.

It might be the case that, due to the incredible ignorance and egoism of the people, the percentage that goes to the corrupted politician can go so high that it is more worth it for the politician to keep abusing rather than improving the nation. Even in that case, if not being dumb, the politician is being lazy, egoistic or un-empathetic, again, traits that we have seen do not lead to thriving societies.

The personal benefit of the so called corrupted individual or individuals, abusive in their acts, comes from, as per the mere definition of abuse, from the harm induced to other people in the species. As I’ve stated, there is a personal benefit. And some people call them intelligent because of that.

They are able to manipulate others into tolerating the harm and then get more resources and power for themselves. With that they can solve problems too, reach their goals, therefore, if we understand intelligence the way defined in chapter 2, shortly rephrased, as the ability to solve problems, then yeah, they might be individually intelligent, but, at the level of the human species, at the level of their community, they are stupid and lazy or dumb. Hence I prefer to attribute to these people the following adjective: species-stupid, or species-dumb. Or holders of species level stupidity.

I prefer these terms because I think it can promote a tendency to avoid the temptation of praising them as something positive, like a the fact of having a greater intelligence. Even if they individually do posses it, if we want to keep developing and improving our life as humans, we should avoid positive related words to clearly, overall, damaging actions. Therefore, I prefer to still call them either stupid at species level people or dumb at species level people. I will define later the difference I mark between stupidity and dumbness.

Now, due to talking not only about resources but eventually power, clearly, an institutional framework to control such behaviors is crucial, something that's currently lacking in a lot of countries. I will complete this analysis later.

Switching to the other side of the coin, the main mistake of the citizens is their collective ignorance and lack of desire or ability to learn efficiently. As I’m Spanish, I will use the Spanish example.

The average Spaniard should be more educated in economics and geopolitics, especially in those universal concepts that transcend ideologies. This includes the understanding of the principle that power abhors a vacuum, that money is a source of power, the technical nature of money, how personal debt operates, interest rates, what truly constitutes separation of powers inside a State, and the ability to understand and deduce possible long-term consequences of economic and political decisions.

They also generally lack knowledge about: personal and financial planning mid-to-long-term, lack of knowledge about the laws that regulate the taxes, thus their money and future. An over-age Spanish (+18 years old), from my generation at least, can become an adult without no-one ever explaining to him how to pay his taxes or how to plan his financial future. A grown Spaniard can have no idea about how much he truly pays in taxes, how the laws underneath work, or even why they really exist in the first place.

All these are essential for the search of a better future if desired. Thus we are creating lost people unable to guide themselves or that guide themselves in very poor ways. Like following and paying attention to leaders without questioning them or, if so, questioning them in very shallow and sort of useless ways. Which increases the likelihood of being scammed, abused, being successful.

Apart from this lack of knowledge and its application, our educational system centers around memorization of allegedly useful information too much, instead of embracing the engineer’s way of thinking. So not only the knowledge my society is getting is mostly useless and incomplete for the current state of the world and for the current life needs, but also the methods they use to get knowledge are on the wrong track if we aim for an efficient, thriving society.

Both, the knowledge and the methodology, give raise to weaker and more dependent humans in the psychological point of view. This will be hard to change as we have been raised weak via injection of lots of useless information and wasted time. Spanish people have a big challenge ahead of them. They must overcome it or slowly deteriorate and get enslaved or extinguished.




5.1.1.- A solution for the citizens.

Citizens have part of the blame, but you shouldn’t be too harsh on them, or yourself. It's by no means entirely your fault. You have been in a trap, a scam, a system that molds you that way and coerces you to waste your time.

A system pertaining to an outdated reality which molds the community and then exploits your follow-the-community instinct to make you re-act instead of pro-act.

Hope can be found in the fact that we are like water, our shape can mold, it's not fixed, we are variables. So I really encourage you, in order to get a better future, to improve yourself and encourage those around you to improve that inefficient, non-sustainable part of yourselves that has been imposed on you. More on how to do this later but for now let’s just say Bruce Lee was right:
Be water, my friend.

5.1.2.- A solution for the powerful.

Now, while the average citizen holds some blame due to its ignorance and weak inefficient learning capabilities, we can't overlook the individual responsibility of politicians, who are, after all, our neighbors and compatriots too. Just another human like any other citizen is.

From here, I encourage politicians to be less lazy and put more effort into using their intelligence to embrace and get persuaded by the medium and long-term benefits of communal well-being. These are among others: greater collective wealth (even their personal wealth can be greater long-term than their short-term benefits of today), reduced crime, more enjoyment, better parties, and so on.

I’m talking to politicians but I’m generally referring to anyone who has power and influence on decision making in the institutions, specially in the education related ones. I encourage you to apply Cheerfulism in yourself and talk about it with those around you so its influence slowly creates changes that lead with little to no trauma to this better future. We will all walk together to a better future and then... we will throw all together the biggest party ever. I personally find the party goal super exciting.

Don’t you find that appealing powerful ones? Let me try to seduce you even further:

A note for the powerful ones:

It is true by reasons which will be explained later that I believe Cheerfulism will create a tendency for a more distributed world.

A more distributed power will probably lead to you not having as much power as of now. Thus it is understandable if you repudiate Cheerfulism at first glance. Yet this is why I mentioned paces of change and trauma. As an example of people with power, rich oligarchs, are also people, and sudden great down shifts on their wealth will create a strong opposing force to change.

Let me present you reasons to not fear Cheerfulism:

	1.- I don’t stop mentioning the idea of gradual change to avoid trauma. This trauma and stress is thought from all perspectives. From the average citizen to the oligarchies. The emphasis of Cheerful individuals to learn and adapt sustainably with others should let you fear less the appearance of big changes that lead to worsening your conditions at an unbearable pace.

	2.- I’m assuming you will lose some power and resources, but that is not really a given. If you become Cheerful and maximize your intelligence you might figure out a way to keep them without being abusive to the overall species. This point is very related to the following.

	3.- Another reason not to fear Cheerfulism is that if you, as an oligarch, decide to live by Cheerful principles, you will find yourself with more flexibility to adapt to the new changes that will be brought to the world. Good news for you are that you probably already have the resources (money) to reinvent yourself in a really efficient way. The only thing you need now is the personal will and dedication that Cheerfulism can awaken in you too.

Thus for these three main reasons, powerful ones, even if you could end up with less power, you should not fear a Cheerful society.

But wait… what about people who got into power through extreme crime and violence? Like murdering, wars etc.

Simply explained, my conclusion is that you are in a big mess and if I were in that situation, I would rather prefer my enemies to be Cheerful. You might be in an unavoidable bad situation where people want you dead due to your crimes. Cheerfulism then is just the lesser bad, the most empathetic enemies. I would rather have an empathetic intelligent enemy than a dumb cold one.

Cheerful people are expected to seek less harsh or no revenge, because it tends to chaos and intelligent people tend to not tackle more chaos than they can handle. So if you committed horrible crimes to get to your oligarch position, in a Cheerful society, you can be a bit less worried about its consequences when you no longer hold as much power.

As an idea, maybe a Cheerful nation does not kill you but just isolates you in a desert luxury island. You might think, why would they do that if I hold power no more, they will probably just kill me. And, in the current state of the world, indeed.

Healthy is to mention that in a Cheerful world you would not have committed those crimes (abuses) in the first place. The problem arises mainly during the transition to a Cheerful society. I personally lean towards a general one-time forgiveness and exile of previous abusers, yet just once, to transition and never go back to it. Forgive just once and then not forget. This is still hard, as even on exile, the people who deeply hate you can eventually track you and kill you.

If the one reading this is a powerful criminal with some people wanting you dead, I can’t assure you Cheerfulism will 100% safe you, yet I think it is the best option. You already made a lot of bad for some people. Cheerful enemies are the best inside the worst, because having an enemy is always bad. Again, what would you prefer? The person seeking revenge on you being a radical believer of whatever dogma, or someone Cheerful?

Your chances of survival given an amount of pain inflicted to several people are low, and it will always be like that. I just think that under Cheerfulism those chances are the greatest possible.

My thought on what would be the best solution to your situation is to let you have your power until you die from old age while you agree on making the education of new generations Cheerful so as to this chaos never repeats itself again. And hopefully, after your death, the person that takes your power (whether economical or political) is a bit more Cheerful due to coming from a society with more Cheerful individuals. 

Teaching the Cheerful life-path to future generations is the key for giving them the tools to shape a better world. And slowly but surely, making newer humans more and more Cheerful every-time is the way to go. Whether you are in the purest decentralized State or the the most centralized dictatorship.

Now imagine, just imagine, you are a socialist dictator. You can start focusing the education system in the engineer’s way of thinking and team work with a really good socialist argument: A smarter average citizen that can work along their peers is the best equipped working class! What is better for them that to give them a public system that equips them with the intelligence and teamwork to face the evil capitalism and libertarianism?!

And boom! There you got it. You are still in power for years until you die and you can start making your population more Cheerful bringing prosperity to your nation. Hopefully a good bunch of years pass until you die. And then the inheritor of your power has committed way less crimes than you or even 0 thanks to the beginning of the Cheerful ideas’ influence in your society.

Notice that it does not matter which ideology you follow in your dictatorship. You can always create your discourse in such a way to justify Cheerfulism’s insertion into the education system. As in Cheerfulism’s core lies useful natural human values that can be appreciated and integrated with any discourse. This is because Cheerfulism has been crafted around the natural need we all crave and share regardless of anything, a happy life.

Also notice that if your crimes are less severe, like corruption by stealing public funds, all these arguments apply. Cheerful people are the best enemies due to its empathy and focus on sustainable intelligent change. An example of a more Cheerful perspective to punishment against corruption would be, instead of years in prison, you might jut live a normal life as a normal citizen but with a debt as big as the money you stole. Forcing you to live kinda freely yet anchored to your sins until you redeem them, a.k.a. return the stolen money by repaying it as debt via a special tax.

Let’s keep noticing stuff. Notice that by just being an oligarch does not necessarily mean that you did something wrong, it jut means a small group of people having the power, which of course might lead to abuses, yet just might, and some of them can perfectly be not abusive people.

Well powerful readers, hope all these reasons inspired you to start influencing society in a Cheerful way. And, if you are just a citizen, hope this helped you understand your leaders’ positions better.

Do you see it? I’m trying to make everyone understand each other and make each other aware of the sacrifices both parties will have to make. This is an important part of what empathy is, a key trait to minimize abuse, to maximize mutual understanding and agreement. More about this soon.

Oh and citizens, note that, due to what we learned in the chapter of power dynamics, some powerful people could have caused bad accidentally. As simplifying a complex reality by fixing too much variables at once can lead to unexpected and undesired bad side effects. So indeed, powerful people can just be clumsy and just another victim of their own human cognitive limitations. Victims of ideologies leading them to ineffective solutions to modern problems following methods from the past, as we all can be. Like a previously mentioned outdated educational system.

Or they can also be evil, or egoistic, psychopaths. But still, I do consider any of these traits dumb for the reasons explained at the beginning, the sacrifice of short-term gains for long-term common losses, abuse. Abusing always looks dumb given enough time. So, let’s just all become more intelligent.

5.1.3- A general solution.

Changing the educational systems’ approaches is the key factor to bring a Cheerful world, more on why and how to do this in chapter 6.

Before getting more technical, I'd like to conclude with my vision of the 'perfect society' from the resource management protocols point of view.

A Cheerful libertarian society, both ethically and economically, that focuses on allowing individuals to live and shape their life's journey. In this society, families should educate each other on respect and the importance of communal well-being, as the realization of its benefits is something humans usually learn by committing egoistic mistakes, a fresh born human will tend to make the mistakes again if not warned. 

As an example of communal well-being, if you're knowledgeable about nutrition, why not occasionally assist your family or friends in that regard? I believe the world will reach its pinnacle of happiness and resource management optimization if we achieve to make this focus a tradition.

I must declare I understand family not as just your DNA sharing relatives. I understand family, generally speaking, as those humans you enjoy hanging around with and that will always be there for you if they can. This might include people with similar DNA or not.

How to improve the world:

So, coming back to getting a better future, how do we transition from where we are now to where we should be? It all starts with self-change.

From time to time take a ham sandwich or something else if you're vegetarian. Then, energized, take a walk, the first one try to take it alone, and then take another walk with those around you, reflecting on your desires, who surrounds you, their desires, how you can achieve your goals, how you can be assisted on that and how you can assist others in achieving theirs. All with methods that don’t use abuse first, and if not possible, change the goal, and if not possible, use the methods that require the minimal abuse.

If most or all of us adopt this mindset, I genuinely believe we can make it. It's about taking those small but significant steps, day by day, decision by decision, that compound into a collective journey towards a society that's more conscious, empathetic, and, ultimately, more harmonious.

That is the essence, whether you hold power or not, on how you can improve the world.

Some of you might be in a place where you don’t have much in common with the people around you and you might have to find a way to move somewhere else in the quest for happiness. The thing is people can be very different, and that is why in these conversations, listening to others, respectful speech and not to use violence is essential. Violence and chaos are easier to emerge when people coexisting are too different.

The key for avoiding this might rely on awakening a certain feeling. A feeling of companionship arising from the fact that you both are different, but no matter how different you are, you both want to cooperate for the same ultimate goal on the quest for sustainable happiness. Thus there you got something in common to calm you down, to talk about, and thus helping to see or feel different people less like “the other”, “the enemy”, “the different”, and more like “the partner”, “the buddy”.

Hopefully this common quest for long-term happiness creates a bond that calms down the waters no matter the amount of differences. Of course physical or verbal fights can happen when discussing, the key is, in those moments, remembering we all are here for the same reason and we are all moved by the same human nature we act upon. We all want the best for ourselves and our families despite the tags and descriptions we are using when trying to solve conflicting points, when trying to fix variables and solve problems.

All this will probably create a sense of brotherhood that calms down the situation so to keep debating and actually solving the problems.

I’m assuming that water, food and security are assured. If that is not the case let me doubt about a high likelihood for this feeling of brotherhood to arise. If you are hungry, you don’t think, you are hungry.

Regarding the society I live in, Spain, I think we're already quite good at this. The main issue I perceive is that we're very ignorant in the parts of human knowledge I explained above. Plus we use really bad learning techniques which raise us up with reduced curiosity. As all we do is not to intellectually explore but mostly memorize and follow strict orders during the golden years of our childhood and youth, which is when most of our character will be forged.

This leads us to make poor decisions or be easily deceived, or scammed, or dominated by people or shyness. It's like we're stuck in a cycle, but it's not an unbreakable one. We can learn, adapt, and grow, both individually and together as a society.

A big hug to everyone and stay strong. It won't be easy, but it's certainly worth it. (:D)

X.- Conclusion: Chapter-5

Main conclusions: It’s not about socialism or freedom. It’s not again about dichotomies that keeps us separated, it has always been about knowing oneself and one’s neighbors, about coordinating with them with the least abuse as we can manage to, whether through a State or not.

However, as a State signals the existence of abuse within a society, it is better to lean towards trying to be comfortable with a freer, less statist world. The deepest reason at the core of this?

Please don’t fall in the segregation of society by freedom or statism. Guide yourself by following where and how the abuse is happening and what could fit better in your hood to avoid polarization and extreme consequences.

I’ve also explained why I think Cheerfulism mixed with libertarianism maximizes the optimal solution long term to the resource management protocol dilemma. Yet this is not the full solution, we are lacking the political protocol, I aim for democracy. We will explore this trifecta further in chapter 7.

When I mean a protocol is the best way, I don’t mean there wouldn’t be any bad in the world if we execute it, it just means these are the best principles to think and act upon that reach minimization of bad while optimizing good. Defining good and bad with the proposed definition in chapter 2 based on the human nature of happiness and survival.

Another way mentioned to get closer to our peak of well-being could also be, with a lot of time and effort, becoming an anarchist-looking species through getting crazy good efficient AIs and combining them with perfect size societies that communicate in a trust minimized manner using blockchain based decentralized networks.

Okay but… while scientist and engineers improve our technology, what can we all do to transition towards this new Cheerful society? Well, little steps have been outlined along the text. Summing up again, use the philosophy of Cheerfulism while trying to reduce in your personal life the 6 sources of abuse mentioned earlier.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transition from Chapter 5 to Chapter 6

We explored the challenges of organizing resources in a society and the mistakes and problems its people make and face. We also explored earlier the challenges and workings of power dynamics. During all that we saw that the Cheerful principles can help a lot in solving these problems in a very efficient manner. But, we were now commenting it, how do we transition?

I’ve been giving advice along the chapters: share knowledge, eat food and take a walk with people to chat, research, practice the engineers’ way of thinking, alter your education to learn more useful knowledge, etc. All these little steps aggregated over time should eventually lead to the greatest prosperity.

Is there anything else to do? Indeed, welcome to chapter 6. On education.

Education is the key to change, and understanding its workings is essential to nail the perfect pace of change. Furthermore, we need to be good somehow at transmitting all we have learn to newer generations.

So let’s go, let’s understand and improve education to optimize our change and learning.

Oh wait, these previous paragraphs are from previous versions of Cheerfulism.

In previous versions of Cheerfulism, after exploring politics and economics, I jumped straight into education. This is because I assumed that world peace was something very very likely if we become Cheerful, but the deeper I thought about it, the less clear it became.

I assumed that the educational system I proposed in following chapters, which I still propose, mixed with all my analysis and my philosophy, would create world peace in some decades.

I assumed that a very efficient or a tendency for a very efficient resource management mixed with education would eradicate wars. And it will, it is just not a sufficient condition, just a necessary one. I realized something disappointing, power is involved in the equation. So the answer to this problem, the way to transition to solving it, became not that straightforward.

All the assured, almost holy, benefits deduced out of Cheerfulism’s potential influence on resource management and education, cracked a bit under the realization that at international levels, there is no State who can control chaos if too much abuse is given. And then, survival instincts can and might kick in, making rational thought and happiness optimization likely impossible.

In other words, there is a reason why I first tackle politics and then economics in this book. As I said in the transition to chapter 5, you first need to satisfy the basic survival in order to even consider the resource management problem. And even in order to be Cheerful. One of the survival needs is security, and security, nowadays is provided by the State.

There is no State of the world. How can we manage to co-exist peacefully without a State granting security? International dilemmas are still in savages settings, in the jungle. Therefore, sometimes States behave with each other as that, scared monkeys, or greedy ones.

Suddenly achieving world peace as of today, seemed as unlikely as achieving an anarchist nation. Because if we can not manage to organize without a State at national levels, like anarchist, why would we be able to do so at international levels? Do we need a world government? Is that even possible? Will world peace be possible only if anarchism becomes viable?

So many questions right? That is why this became a new chapter.

As a small spoiler, I’m optimistic, I think we can manage to achieve world peace, even if we do not manage to get anarchism at national levels.

Say no more, before diving deeper into the core of progress, of change and adaption, which is education, I will deviate a little and create this whole chapter explaining my reasons and thoughts on why world peace can be a thing relatively soon.

My prediction is that it will become a thing 15-20 years after the great majority of the world fully integrates Cheerfulism.

Welcome to the most optimistic yet horrible chapter in the book. Welcome to chapter 6.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

