You create conflict, so you make the information move the muscles in opposing ways, creating clashes, wether that conflict is real or not it does not matter, as long as one opposes the other and triggers the natural biological process of human problem solving in people it is enough to create a fight for power.

Make the conflict too big and instead of people debating they will shout at each other, make it even bigger and they will kill each other. The bigger, the more variables, the more complex the system, the more intelligent and strong you have to be so as to not to create uncontrolled chaos.

It is common thought nowadays that politicians appeal to emotions to make people move, but in reality, at the core, they are appealing to their problem solving nature. And then, most people, use emotions to fix lots of variables at once to try to get a solution. Emotions are just a tool coded in our biology to try to solve problems quickly by fixing lots of variables.

4.1.3.1.- Emotions, its biological nature and its role in power dynamics.

We saw that emotions can be understood as a biological answer to a problem via fixing lots of variables at once as per what is biologically coded on your body’s chemistry.

So when are emotions triggered? When an individual perceives itself as not intelligent and strong enough to solve the problem in a timely manner and fears the negative outcome of that.

Then, given a short enough time left for being punished due to not solving the problem, even the most intelligent individuals can be triggered the emotional response. So, in order to make someone use their emotions to solve a problem, you need either to make people perceive the problem as too big or as too imminent, or both.

Using instincts, which ultimately is what emotions are, is useful in simple contexts or in ones that our biology has “trained for”, evolved for, for hundreds of years.

Like, if you are in nature and see a predator too close to you, even if the predator is not there and you have mistaken it with a chunk of wood, your biological body can deem the situation too risky to think and just trigger instinctive impulses, to fix lots of variables in your brain and act quick, solve the problem quick.

Instincts are just these complex reactions to the environment we can have without rationally thinking.

In the predator situation, should I climb the tree? Grab a stick to defend myself? Just run? You won’t think, you will act to whatever biological response was programmed on you at that moment. And it will be different to each one of us. Some will run, some will even become paralyzed, some will grab a weapon etc etc.

Rephrasing myself, the more intelligent you are the more complex the problem or the closer in time its bad consequences have to be in order to trigger in you this instinctive emotional response. Which ultimately is just a biological problem solving technique to fix lots of variables real quick.

Fixing too much variables at once, specially in the complex problems and societal contexts we live in nowadays, likely leads to sub-optimal solutions that tend to chaos. Because we have not evolved for the modern world.

Evolution takes lot years for today’s humans and we are facing problems that are not that old compared to our biology. Furthermore, our problems are very complex. So to solve them by fixing lots of variables via evolutionary and experience driven means is just an unlikely way to find the optimal solution for new complex problems. As they are new and involve lots of variables, even new unknown ones. Our hard-wired solutions, our instincts, likely do not have the best solution in “their memory”.

This is why, by focusing more on the core principles of problem solving we all share, instead of the arbitrary quickly fixed variables that emotions are, we can better coordinate power dynamics and reach utopian societies, more on this later.

For now I just want to highlight that this is the core explanation on why Cheerful individuals will create the most utopian societies. Because they are focused on solving problems intelligently and guided by our best and deeply craved reward mechanism, happiness. So it does not matter how many variables they face, or how quick they have to face them, the likelihood of them using emotions and creating chaos when facing hard and new complex topics will be the minimal possible.

This does not mean that Cheerful individuals refuse to use emotions, but that they have mastered when and when not to use them.

This does not mean either that Cheerful individuals will never use them incorrectly. As said all along, trial and error is part of human nature, fix and vary. This is about statistical attitudes than tend to the minimization of a bad result, not an assurance.

This is why maximizing intelligence makes you less manipulable via emotions and even via rational tricks. Manipulation can become an abuse, and minimizing abuse sources is a key aspect on utopian societies, more on the next chapter.

This has been the explanation on how and why emotions play a role in power dynamics and why nowadays we should not depend on them for new, vital and complex modern problems. Now let’s continue with our overall understanding.

4.1.4.- What we now know, what we did, and the way forward to optimize power dynamics.

Doing a little recap. We wanted to understand politics, the act of gathering and conquering power. Thus we understood that that is just organizing information to make muscle move. Then we understood why muscles move, to survive and to be happy. So to gather power you have to make people feel like they need to survive or to be happy, or just happier.

We saw that to survive or be happier you need to solve problems if they appear. And we saw that people who seek gathering power can leverage that by trying to solve a problem, real or not, in different opposing ways. Some of these people (politicians), will fix some variables to solve the problem and others will fix other variables. Now this different fixations can be conflictive. And conflict tends to chaos.

Unfortunately enough, even if someone reached important amounts of power via the other less violent source of power: happiness, there is still a risk, what if the solution proposed to any problem or conflict was just wrong?

This could happen due to the lack of information management advancements, and/or the lack of enough intelligence. People could just not question some fixed variables quick enough and some extra chaos due to bad answers could have been crafted.

Which, it could be leveraged by other being seeking for power, creating a dichotomy, a never ending cycle of trial and error.

A never ending display over reality of the fix variable resolution technique.

A never ending loop of receiving information, processing it and trying to resolve conflictive one.

A never ending tale of good and evil, people trying to survive and be happy, fixing variables, leading to simplifications of reality when lots survive. Simplifications that do not hold in all circumstances, thus requiring revision every now and then.

This is the scientific understanding on this romantically expressed dance between good and evil, or yin and yang, the never ending history of humans that rhymes when people try to solve similar problems in different societies separated by time and/or space.

Fortunately enough, that era of reaching very bad decisions can be very over as we now can manage information astonishingly fast. Thus we can solve problems way more efficiently. Thanks to internet (fast access to information), AI (fast processing of information) and CDNs (reliability of the information).

We are entering this new era in which we can exploit orders of magnitude better the technique that has granted us this well-being and capability of survival. A great change will occur, it is occurring, it must occur or we will slowly die. And if we become Cheerful, it will occur better, faster, more efficiently.

While we do all this, we still have to face the chaos forged in our past. That chaos produced from simplifying the complex topics the labels good and evil embraced. From fixing variables assigning them incorrect meanings that do not adequately reflect reality. These simplifications eventually made them be based on arbitrary truths that people believed applicable in a general context, when they were not. They were adapted to a reduced, often wrong, vision of reality. Which through history it has been seen that leads to conflict in complex scenarios like life itself.

When seeing this phenomena from an individual point of view, it looks quite absurd, because it is designed or it is a consequence that only makes sense from a crowd flow point of view. It’s the little mistakes made upon this simplified truth that get aggregated and, with time, conclude in some kind of conflict.

We saw that religion is not as big of an excuse to move muscles anymore. The ease of moving information has created other sources of power. All these share the same pattern, the same main source, simplifying and opposing concepts to gather people under your command to win disputed decisions and see who gets more power.

Some other examples of nowadays simplifications used for the flow of information in the quest for power are:

- Simplifying the feminism movement to confront men vs women.
- Simplifying renewable sources of energy and adaptation to confront ecologist vs “planet killers”.
- Simplifying human sexual desires and love to confront heterosexual people vs whoever is not straight.

Artificial rivals deduced from a real intellectual effort to describe a problem, which might be true and real, but both of its simplified derived dichotomies are wrong to some extent as they have been created through a simplification of reality. And when simplifying you always miss little details that in complex systems tend to be crucial when trying to minimize chaos.

What is worse, usually they are not dichotomies like a path that bifurcates, but different faces of the same coin, like faith and reason. This usually leads to the feeling of absurdism and the feeling of “this could have been avoided” after some conflict ends or diminishes.

All these dichotomies, for learning purposes are not bad, but, for solving real life complex systems, they are. Those little details are as important as the whole. A small perturbation in the complex systems we live in can cause unpredicted, and probably undesired, consequences. Just like butterfly effects.

But the people nowadays seems to use this simplified truths to guide themselves as if they were absolute truth and don’t usually adapt or it takes them lots of years, or a big catastrophic event, to change their minds. And sadly, to change them juts a little bit.

Politicians and whoever is fighting for power in this world (maybe some others with lots of money) know this, people demand simplified actions for complex truths.

Unfortunately, this seems unavoidable, due to the graph theory analysis explained earlier. As societies grow, a person can not know well enough everything and eventually always demands a simplified understanding of reality, via a State, or via an ideology for example.

On top of this, as power aspirants are often fighting for power not by conviction but out of necessity as their economical earnings depend on it. The world leaders tend to act like in a market, there is a demand for a product and they just offer it. Leading to them acting in stupid ways out of the simplified demands of its people, and, if any politician or powerful individual dares to act in a reasonable and intelligent manner abstracted away from the simplified truths, people won’t understand and for sure the powerful person will gain unpopularity or just be ignored. Then, if not ignored, they will label the powerful as good or bad and that is it. They won’t change short or medium term, if labeled good they will praise the powerful and if bad they will just hate him.

In complex and big societies like ours, with this polarization due to the simple and very static mindset that people live with, making someone hate you can have horrible extreme consequences. Even the extremest ones that seem unlikely, due to how complex our world currently is, by its sheer size, can happen. From the most extreme ones like life or death ones to the weaker but disgusting ones like social bullying.

So, even assuming some powerful people might be doing this out of malice and self-enrichment, their motivations to stop will be little as for sure, due to the simplified truths, they have gathered hatred from people and they won’t feel physically safe coming out of power. And that will be statistically true. Thus this creates a vicious cycle over time which generates an alienation feeling from the powerful to the citizens and vice-versa.

To sum up so far, people live out of simplified truths that are dangerous due to the chaotic butterfly effects in our complex societies. And the powerful ones are not incentivized to renounce to these simple actions due to 3 different reasons:

1.- Their economical dependence from it as they must remain in power to keep having earnings. Wether they are clinging to it because they don’t know how to do anything else with their life, or out of malice and short-term benefit in spite of long term common well being, the demands of people are ultimately what keeps them doing what they do and earning money on the way.

2.- The fear against losing power and returning to a polarized society that, curiously enough, has cerated itself in a vicious cycle. This resulting in the alienation from the powerful to the citizens and vice-versa.

3.- It is easier to guide and rule out of simplified truths rather than affronting reality. Thus some powerful people might just be lazy to evolve their workflow.

Powerful people find themselves in a tricky situation. Whether they keep doing what people demand and thus result in hate, and thus in the impossibility to adapt to a life more aligned with everyone else, or they renounce to simple solutions and risk their power and money to go back living around “normal” people which are polarized and likely dangerous for them. Curiously enough that polarization is sourced in the people themselves but catalyzed by the powerful ones’ decisions. It’s a tale of destined doom.

This vicious cycle of simplification and polarization hinders progress and creates a disconnection between the people and those in power. The prevalent reliance on simplified truths, which people cling to as they don’t require much complex analysis but more memorization of messages, action-reactions, like the ones mainly rewarded in school, obstructs adaptability. It leads to wrong actions by those in power, who, caught in a cycle, lack the incentives to pursue genuine solutions whether they are doing it out of malice or not.

The challenge for advanced societies is to overcome this cycle and bridge the alienation gap between the citizens and its leaders. Cheerfulism will create a path forward, fostering a more understanding and connected society via efficient critical thinking and empathy. Reducing like this the frictions of the unavoidable simplified truths.

1.- This critical thinking reduces the first incentive for powerful to hang onto simplified truths as people will demand less of them.

2.- The empathy reduces their risk of co-existing with non powerful individuals over time.

3.- And, assuming new powerful people will also be, or raised, Cheerfully. The lazy solution shouldn’t appeal to them as much as they will also be equipped by the efficient thinking leveraged by nowadays technologies to finds solutions. Plus, if they are ever tempted by the easy solution, a Cheerful population will notice and take them out of power.

Empathy, as you might have noticed, is not at the core of Cheerfulism. Why do I think Cheerful individuals will be more empathetic? Different reasons of why will be explained later along the book.

For now, as a call for empathy I must add that maybe we all, powerful or not, are natural victims of a necessary consequence of the industrial revolution when memorization was needed. Automated repetitive actions where needed for progress, thus lots people grew up with this tendency of acting based on action-reaction on simple concepts without requiring much or zero analysis. Add this to a world where religion was still pretty influential, which leads to beliefs and less tendency for change, and we got ourselves a pretty high likelihood of craving for too many simplified truths. Whether out of malice or not, this leads to the quest for power to be a matter of simplification and polarization rather than one of understanding and problem solving.

The goal for advancing our civilization is to change the rules of the game for power so they don’t depend that much on simplified truths.

All this follows logically from our intrinsic adaptation technique of the fixed variable resolution technique which is leveraged as seen in power dynamics. Mastering the understanding and use of it by improving the information management flow will generate the least friction possible in our coexistence.

And now, thanks to all the new technologies, it is easier than ever to get good at it. Thus, to ultimately get good and generating good incentives aligning the powerful ones with the citizens. Generating less abuse and the most utopian society that demands the least amount of simplified truths.

The conclusion of this chapter will outline more details to walk towards this goal, but first, let me revisit the concept of nationalism, which was mentioned earlier.

4.1.5.- On nationalism.
Maybe add some thought/note on nationalism as a simplified truth
Coming back to big societies where a physical closeness with neighbors doesn’t exist, if you want them to keep existing, nationalism urges as the need for creating that closeness, the need for something to coordinate us all. To make us work together due to feeling part of the same thing. A need to fix these variables in a more complex and bigger society we are living in and trying to solve, trying to coordinate in a good way. Again use the definition of good given in the book.

All the big powerful enough societies, so called countries, use nationalism as a glue to stick together the different dynamic parts of the ethics and ways-of-living from its people within a diverse nation. An attempt of creating a shared identity among societies’ citizens which allows them to have bigger terrain to rule over. Now here you might notice you got a static concept trying to rule the dynamic human existence. Exactly, that also lead to problems, due to solutions that did not fit or adapted to reality in a realistic way. It is always like this, through old and current history.

So, if we assume we want to keep the nations the size they are: 

What could be a tool, following the natural fixed variable resolution technique, which would allow us to solve efficiently the need for something that sticks together big nations, the need for nationalism?

4.1.5.1.- Thoughts on a substitute for nationalism: language and law.

Currently, the feeling of belonging to a nation is linked to the culture of a region.

Understanding culture as the collective average way-of-living, the average things people from  the region do day to day in their lives: their traditions, languages, religions etc. This feeling of belonging or shared identity is nationalism, the glue which sticks big and small nations together as mentioned earlier.

But basing a shared fixed identity in ultimately dynamic ever evolving things like traditions and habits can create conflict when those traditions, that shared identity, starts to change and some people stop feeling identified with it or enjoy them.

But how to avoid this conflict? How to create a dynamic identity for a nation as dynamic as the nature of its people? Maybe it is impossible, if so, then, how to minimize the conflict?

If you think it practically, the only things needed to define and coordinate your society (your nation) are the language you speak and the punishments that can be applied to you (the law).

This sets the basic atomic rules for organization: the ability to process and respond to information plus the ability to decide upon contradictory one.

The only 2 essential conditions that must be met to have a stable society is people talking the same language so they can communicate and coordinate ideas plus some way or being capable of punishing them in case of misbehaving. Meaning by misbehaving that the individual has contradictory information, thus incompatible, to the one of the law.

So, instead of nationalism, you just need language and law.

Language and law are dynamic and its evolution pace is something that people can follow along with. Also both factors are general, meaning with this that they are the same for all, not arbitrary like if someone likes or not a tradition and beliefs or not on some religion.

Thus, in order to stick a big nation together, people should be able to follow along the natural pace of change of language and law. This will result in breaking or weakening as less as possible the national feeling of a shared identity while linking it to a way more dynamic and general source, creating less friction. Minimizing conflict.

As a personal example of tradition that weakens/breaks national identity is bullfighting in Spain. In my grandparents time it was part of the culture but now a good amount of people reject it creating discomfort in society, a deep change in what it truly means to be Spanish.

In the most efficient future, big or small nations with rational individuals like Cheerful ones, will use this purest version of nationalism based on the 2 factors of law and language. Sounds logical to consider a future where nationalism is way more, or ideally, totally unlinked from arbitrary changing factors like culture and feelings to more general and absolute factors like language and law.

As explained in previous sections, Cheerful people do use emotions and enjoy them, they feel them, they do not reject them. They just are better at understanding when and when not to use them. With nationalism it is the case, using emotions and subjective non-general guides can be more optimal.

Surely, in a world where people are guided more by emotion than rational thinking, nationalism will need to be linked to emotions, which are just, in the same way of rational thinking, a problem solving technique fixing variables and all the things I’ve said so many times already.

I do not think this version of nationalism is doable in our current times, it is a really long term proposal.

In this future, a Spanish person would be someone who speaks Spanish and which can be punished by the state that controls the Spanish territory. It must be said that in this long-term future I envision I don’t think the borders will be as they are today, they will probably change a lot.

In this ideal case people will slowly redefine borders and group up according to their ethics represented in punishments (law) and according to the languages they speak. Hopefully, in a Cheerful and peaceful way.

This should end up creating a more efficient nationalist feeling on humans. Easier to feel related to along time. Creating a base which should help in tolerance and acceptance. Ultimately leading to solving or directly not creating internal conflict, thus creating a more peaceful world even with big nations.

But what about external conflict? What about 2 nations? As said, hopefully, in the end, Cheerful individuals are able to redefine borders in a cooperating, empathetic way. Only resulting in violence and war when vital resources are truly limited.

There are more important caveats to understand about 2 nation interactions, but those will be explained later in the book.

Must be added that in this remaining path to this ideal society there are still wars and blood to be shed. People are currently very emotionally influenced when planning their future, at least if you compare them to the Cheerful individual I envision long term. Thus in the upcoming times troublesome nationalism closely linked to culture will still exist and disputes or new borders definitions will still cause trouble.

I hope people start educating new generations in Cheerfulism, so slowly with time and generations, the new ones tend to create less trouble than the previous ones. Eventually landing in the peaceful utopia I envision.

4.1.5.2.- What will shape big nations if not nationalism?

As said, law and language mainly.  Plus probably hobbies and jobs.

I envision a future where people won’t say, I feel from this country cause of a flag or tradition. Nationalities will be defined by languages and the grayest moral areas, stuff like abortion for example.

You could say that hobbies and jobs are what originated the feeling of belonging to a place and from where all cultures come from. Indeed that is the origin and I think they will still play a role in shaping the future nations.

A simple and straightforward example are mines. Where there are mines, miners go to live, and you need services for the miners, water supply etc Eventually creating a new society which will have its own mining related traditions, beliefs… lifestyle.

If for any reason I’m wrong about the substitute being law and language plus a bit of hobbies and jobs, I just hope the future is conformed by people who are aware of the underlying dynamic nature of their static nationalist feeling and how it generates conflict. Thus generating a desire to walk towards a more flexible version of it that creates less conflicts.

I hope the people from the future, being aware of that their traditions are not necessarily what defines their shared identity, realize that they are just hobbies or jobs that have lasted through time and that not everyone will always have the same hobbies, jobs or even beliefs.  Eventually substituting and/or complementing all these with something we all can follow along and can agree along time, like law and language.

4.1.5.3.- How Cheerful individuals will change borders peacefully?

An individual experienced in practicing Cheerfulism, a Cheerful individual, will be fully aware of the natural forces that guide his happiness and will have practiced and have been educated in being as intelligent as possible. This resulting in an more cheerful, pro-active, explorer and empathetic personality. 

This is because the ability to analyze everything efficiently also translates into understanding others’ emotions and motivations better. Furthermore, the natural urge to explore, to discover himself and his desires does nothing but emphasize this need to listen and understand feelings, awakening even more empathy.

All these makes the experienced Cheerful individual someone who will look at a foreigner who doesn’t speak its language and will see it as an equal, just with some inefficient communication between them. See it as someone who is the same as him, just trying to be happy before the ultimate punishment we all share, death.

Add to this that experienced Cheerful individuals likely worry, care and know their neighbors. Then it is even easy to imagine people feeling from the same nation as others physically far away from them. As Cheerful individuals can easily connect and communicate with others thanks to sharing this common goal of long term happiness.

Let the language that unite us be happiness, let the natural law of death be the one that complements it. Let it then the most pure and human nationalism be born, a nationalism of a whole race, based on an universal language and a universal law, happiness and death.

Due to the empathetic view of seeing everyone as equal and sharing the goal of happiness despite of trying to achieve it with some different rules and different languages, I think Cheerful individuals will be able to change the borders in the most peaceful way if required. Via intelligent coordination, negotiation, empathy and a shared vision.

4.1.5.4.-  Adapting to law and language: Progressive asymmetrical statistical gauge of law.

Don’t worry this section is not complex, I just wanted to give it a fancy name.

The following idea presents a technical way of molding law in order to make it easier for people to adapt to it. When nationalism is shaped by law and language it is even more important for people to feel related to them, to evolve with them.

Adapting to language should not be a problem because as languages evolve their speakers can learn the changes easily. Elders might not understand some of the new teenagers’ jargon but that is it, they still can communicate. I can’t prove it but I don’t think that that, historically, has been the source of wars or big misunderstandings inside societies.

Law suddenly changing, on the other hand, is. So a democracy is crucial for people to feel as represented as possible in an efficient way. And the following idea, build on top of democracy, can help in the process of making law the actual reflection of societies’ current morals and needs for control.

This method should make law changes be more aligned with human nature and thus allow citizens for easier adaptation and better reaction to these changes. This should reduce the weight of emotions in the process of modifying some laws to make it more scientific, reliable and adaptive.

I name the technique: Progressive asymmetrical statistical gauge of law.

The idea is to slowly change (progressive) law punishments or law enforcements (like taxes) along time based on data analytics (statistical).

Based on data analysis slightly increase or decrease the enforcements of the law, but, doing it in a bigger amount when the data has deemed worse results along time and improving them in a smaller amount when the data has shown good results (asymmetrical).

Briefly and simply explained in 2 examples:

1.- Crime rate increases this year, the punishment for those crimes also increases in some amount. Then crime rate decreases in the following year? Then punishment decreases that year too, but at a smaller pace than they increase.

2.- A sugar tax increase or decrease to regulate people’s caloric intake and try to prevent obesity. Just for this example, assume this measure actually works. The percentage of tax in sugar would go up if more people are obese compared to the previous time period, and if less people are obese, the tax goes down. But as said, the rate at which the amount goes down will be smaller than the rate at which the amount goes up.

This asymmetry is to assure it takes a proved larger continuous good behavior of citizens in order to really get a reward, making sure a human has taken the habit of “well-behaving”. 

This reflects the life’s natural truth of: rewards from good habits take time and consistency to manifest but damages from bad habits take shorter to do so.

Simply and intuitively explained, it is easier (takes less time and effort), to fall into drug-addiction than quitting from it. Or becoming obese rather than becoming an athlete.

This asymmetry is meant to reflect the true nature of human change, again falling into bad changes is way easier that making good ones. Thus hopefully will make people feel more related to the laws they create and mold.

How to determine each rate of change for each law? How to determine how frequently this rates should be updated? How to determine which direction is bad and which one is good?

Trial and error and democracy is the best way. This is because, as it can be seen in the last question, ethics is involved in setting a direction, so to avoid as much conflicts as possible due to it’s already discussed static-dynamic nature, democracy should be the most efficient way to implement measures like this one.

Answering the first questions, the starting values for the rates of change and the frequency of their updates should not be taken at random. I think the best start would be choosing values form already existing data and human knowledge. For example knowledge on human psychology, specialized on punishment and reward mechanisms with a bit of sociological analysis.

I must mention, as I’ve done throughout the text, people raised or/and that live by Cheerfulism should eventually be able to do answer all these questions with certain ease.

Thus, this technique naturally reaches its peak of usefulness when applied on a Cheerful democratic society.

X.- Conclusion: Chapter-4.1.

Let’s sum up the main ideas presented so far in this chapter. We explored how humans apply and coordinate their power with one another. We also defined ethics and presented is acquired dual nature when applied to societies, being this the static-dynamic dilemma that creates conflict and pain-points inside a society. All stemming and reflecting the way our brain processes information: the fixed variable resolution technique.

Then we explored how information creates and shapes power and also presented nationalism, an answer to: How do you coordinate a big society with big amounts of people, each one with their own ethics and lifestyles?

Then I explained why the current understanding and definition of nationalism is conflictive and proposed one that could, and I think will, be used instead (long-term, specially if people become Cheerful). Due to its more flexible and adaptive nature: nationalism based on law and language. With that I also presented the progressive asymmetrical statistical gauge of law to help the static nature of ethics in law be more reactive abiding by real natural dynamics of society and the biology of the individuals that conform it.

Also during the chapter we explored how democracy is a really good method for coordinating this two natures of ethics inside a society as it updates every now and then the static order with the dynamic will of the people.

Among all these I presented how all these societal phenomena are just a way of arranging information to coordinate people to execute their power. I explored some methods commonly used to move big amounts of people and thus power. One being happiness and the other one the simplification of truths to easily dichotomize and move groups in opposing ways.

4.2.-  Going deeper in Cheerfulism and new tech on power dynamics.

Now given the understanding I’ve presented on power dynamics I’m going to conclude with more details on how I think Cheerful individuals would affect society’s power dynamics if most of the people acted like them. I will also briefly discuss how the new technologies will affect all this.

4.2.1.- First, regarding the dichotomization of society.

Regarding the confrontation techniques of simplified truths to get power by managing crowds of people against each other. 

Cheerfulism, as it results in a mix of critical thinking for adaptation with a happiness orientation, it leads to higher empathy, which will make the effectiveness of these techniques or phenomena reduced. Because emotion driven chaotic responses will be minimized as explained earlier. These crowd movement techniques or phenomena polarize people and result in conflicts and even wars which, sadly, sometimes, as the truth they are based on, make no sense or seem avoidable when analyzed generally.

We, finally as species got the technology for allowing ourselves the luxury of focusing on the dynamic part of our critical thinking behavior more intensively rather than the memorization fixed one. The tendency of focusing on critical thinking and on adaptation will make people adapt faster and reliably thanks to the new technologies to digest (AI) and verify (blockchain) information. And at the same time, thanks to the emphasis and natural appearance on an empathetic more intelligent view we won’t be only improving ourselves towards happiness but also others with us, we will all walk more synchronized and peacefully. Like that, we will reduce conflict at its purest minimum.

As a personal note, when changing along with people it’s super important to respect each others’ learning pace to avoid conflict. An abrupt change will bring more chaos spikes than a gradual one along your friends. And as seen, chaos requires more intelligence to control, yet our intelligence has a limit but chaos doesn’t. So we better minimize it as best as we can manage to.

As a personal example of this, my father is very fat and he has been trying to be healthy for years. I know the basics of nutrition and exercise to avoid that condition so I explained them to him and made plan for him to follow. Yet it is taking him years to change it, yet not for that I must get angry at my father. He is not intelligent and strong enough to execute it. Getting angry, even if you feel impotent, will only stress everyone up even more and create more chaos.

I hope that the empathy people will eventually develop will allow the pace of change to be as peaceful as possible. And, I hope that if Cheerfulism’s principles get enough popularity people with power will also change slowly with their friends and without fear of being killed or being punished very hard for their stupid decisions made while trying to control a chaos way bigger than their intelligence. Some of them might have been truly evil, but others are just a victim of this focus on simplification, just as normal people are.

This empathy and community involvement (specially in diverse communities) can also be expected to reduce hate levels. For example when virtual social media spreads hate, which quite a bunch of times it’s fake hate from bots, that can be reduced by seeing your very same neighbors every day. Serving as a healthy reminder for the fact that someone having X nationality, or religion, or whatever idea doesn’t imply him or her being an enemy that hates you or deserves to be hated.

Ultimately, whether this phenomena of confrontation is natural or induced by some capitalist power or any kind of hidden power like some people say, Cheerfulism adoption should be able to reduce its presence in society to the purest minimum. And the conflicts that arise from them will be mainly consequence of making mistakes in the pace of change.

Anyway, I do not think all these world issues are planned and consequences of oligarchic masterminds. I think all the big scale issues at societies level arise from oligarchies trying to control more chaos than they can handle, and later some of them, leveraging other oligarch’s mess up try to leverage that chaos to get more power, maybe thinking he is smarter and he can do it better, maybe just because he is egoistic and greedy, yet anyway, the limits of their intelligence keeps making them mess up. And the continuous modern mess ups that keep popping up, like wars, are jut a reflection of not only our oligarchies’ lack of intelligence to do better, but also of any other human in this planet to do better.

It does not matter who is dumber, or who is more intelligent, the fact of avoidable wars that result in the worst consequence for a human society, which is unnecessary murdering, clearly reflects that it is a collective mess up, a collective lack of intelligence.

Violence leads to chaos, and to the ultimate sign of violence, murdering, which tends to create the greatest amount of chaos. And, if violence first rose from a chaotic problem we could not handle, which lead to a butterfly effect of more chaos, this is a never ending tale of destruction. Which will only stop until we can’t tolerate more suffering and then we chose to stop the avoidable war. But this is futile, as it will happen again just by natural chance later dow the line. Because we did not improve our intelligence so to avoid it, but just ignored the problem, suffer the pain, and delay its appearance in other future context. We, all of us, somehow, should aim to become more intelligent, to handle it and even prevent it from happening ever again. The somehow will be explained in later chapters.

The lack of interest of current intelligent people, or powerful oligarchic people to educate the people just further strengthens fixing a variable by hiding and/or not sharing information. Disallowing exploration, due to fear, egoism, laziness, hatred or whatever, yet at the end of the day, it is just fixing information. Another factor slowing down evolution, adaptation, learning. A higher level manifestation of our biological limits when rationally processing information. Or, if you like, a bad choice of variable to fix while thinking like an engineer.

Now notice all these ideas can be generalized to a sort of “abuse of power” from some to others due to lacking information processing capabilities. Or the same but in other words: ignorance reinforced by belief. And that is why the mastery on the engineers way of thinking will make any people, power holding ones too, feel stronger and safer when confronting change in the search of a common better future.

We will dive deeper in the next chapter about understanding who to blame this for, understanding what abuse is etc, as it is tightly related to resource management, economy, which, spoiler, is what next chapter is about.

For now, Cheerful people, aided by quickly efficient information processing thanks to the newest technologies, via avoiding dichotomies as much as possible, learning as much as possible, coordinating instead of competing as much as possible, will be able to influence politics, to influence the fight and conquer for power, in the most efficient, less chaotic way.

Minimizing this way, as much as realistically possible, all conflicts arising from fights for power at any level of societies. Hood level, province level, national level, international level and then global level. Let’s get fancy and futuristic and also say, galaxy level.

4.2.2.- Second, regarding democracy and raw power dynamics.

I think due to the rational and empathetic nature of Cheerful individuals we will all, sooner or later, end up on a democracy.

But actually it will be whatever system fits best to coordinate the human static-dynamic ethic dilemma and the raw military dispute on extreme survival-related problems or territory distribution.

I got a feeling that democracy in small libertarian countries will eventually be the way, more on why this in the next chapters.

The thing I want to point out in this section is that the adaptability from Cheerful individuals‘ rational thinking creates a tendency for it to find the most optimal solution long-term.

All while taking into account others’ happiness too in a natural way. Because, we are a social animal, we need each other to survive and be happy, and if you are just slightly intelligent you will end up understanding nature and realizing that alone is just not the way.

So, whatever system of power dynamics the future turns out to be, it will be the best one we can create. As Cheerfulism with the new technological advancements will allow us to master, to a level we have ever been able to, our biological mechanism for adapting to reality: the fixed variable resolution technique.

4.2.3.- Third, regarding nationalism and army redistribution.

Country borders are defined by how strong is your army relative to your neighbors’ ones. But also it is defined by how cohesive you have your people under the feeling of belonging to the same place, nationalism.

Cheerfulism’s flexibility really first seems like aiming for a world without boundaries. But I don’t think so, it might lead to a world with very flexible ones. I’m not sure about how the dynamics will be army-wise as boundaries evolve. I kind of imagine similar mechanics to the ones Liechtenstein has.

Boundaries are essential for stable development as they are crucial to solve some extreme but realistic problems, like starvation, that can eventually happen as life is complex and not always has predictable outcomes.

I think Cheerfulism and technologically superior societies will slowly transform into ones where nationalism is mainly defined by law and language as explained.

So let’s delve a bit into the other side of the power dynamics and borders question, military power.

Here is a guess I have related to what can happen to the distribution on military armies around the globe. 

Nowadays we got a very strong army player, the United States of America (US), and the rest of armies are small compared to it. Eventually the US is this powerful army-wise because they are like “the controlling part of a couple”. They do not trust others’ decisions and information management enough so as to let them free and cooperate honestly, thus they send their power to influence and ultimately sort of control them, clinging to short-term benefits, not daring or being able to unfix all these variables.

But, with Cheerful individuals, the empathy and adaptability will lead to a “greater trust in your couple”, thus armies will really really slowly redistribute more evenly across the world. Hopefully if people are intelligent enough, we will nail the pace at which this has to happened without creating wars.

The need for a powerful police force only gets reinforced when you don’t trust your neighbor, this is the same at global scales. And, as I expect Cheerfulism and blockchain to increase the trust among neighbors and cooperating parties, I expect the police power and concentration of armies around the world to be distributed more evenly.

But this will happen very very very slowly, due to the intrinsic need that security is for human nature. And due to the small intelligence I think nowadays people posses. And thus any small mistake can lead to catastrophic consequences. But indeed eventually distributing the army power around the world.

Thus this new distribution of armies will clearly affect nations and its shape and, who knows, maybe the nations will get so small that there will be no need for even a nationalist glue to stick a nation together. Only time will tell.

Using awareness and constant improvement with our neighbors and friends is the way to go. And if everyone takes this action, we all can have something in common, brotherhood, an intrinsic human friendship that who knows, maybe eliminates the need for nationalism.

Just by seeking intelligence and happiness, just by being Cheerful, the world might reach the greatest amount of peace it has ever achieved.

4.2.3.1- Understanding armies redistribution with the prisoners’ dilemma.

Before finishing the chapter let me add an interesting game theory analysis point of view of all this reasoning.

A small guess is that if people become Cheerful the world’s problems of independence movements due to nationalism feelings will resolve according to what economically benefits both parties the most long-term. Or, generally, any issue regarding 2 nationalisms.

I came to this conclusion in part from the prisoners’ dilemma. The prisoners’ dilemma is a standard example of a game analyzed in game theory that shows why two individuals might not cooperate, even if it is in their best common interest to do so.

If both prisoners cooperate in an interrogation (stay silent and don’t blow their partner in crime), they both serve a short sentence. If one betrays and the other stays silent, the betrayer goes free while the silent one serves a long sentence. If both betray each other, they both serve a medium-length sentence. Despite cooperation (staying silent) being mutually beneficial overall, the risk of betrayal often leads to both choosing betrayal, resulting in a worse outcome for both.

This thinking process can be interpreted when asking the question on whether to make your army bigger or not just in case your neighbor attacks. If you don’t do it you take the risk of the neighbor betraying you, yet all the wealth and money invested in army could have been used to improve society in other ways. So if both co-existing nations trusted that the other won’t betray they could focus their economical efforts in other stuff that can be seen more useful at first like social welfare or other investments.

Thus increasing the military or not eventually is a philosophy of trust which can be seen as a prisoners’ dilemma. If we assume both parties are rational but also empathetic, like experienced Cheerful individuals, they will probably chose those paths where both maximize their mutual profit instead of the more egoistic or betrayal paths.

It’s a complicated topic because nationalism (along with the law system) is part of what avoids having to fight or even shed blood every time some small amount of people disagree. Pretty complex, as life, nationalism nowadays is a “medicine” for maintaining alive bigger nations yet that can cause secondary effects like hate which leads to international wars or civil wars.

This is a very deep and complex topic and I’m not specialized in politics (the “science” on the fight for power), the understanding of its dynamics is just a hobby in my young life. So please see that I might be missing something on my thoughts. But this is not the point of all the following chapters, I must declare this is an analysis on society from someone who is Cheerful, it does not mean it’s a 100% accurate or correct analysis. 

Power dynamics understanding is a hobby that I felt myself forced to learn about to some degree if I ever wanted to draw the life path that would make me happy in the longest and more sustainable manner. Cheerfulism is meant to create individuals capable of handling and breaking down these complex life challenges in manageable and logical ways.

I hope other people adopting this philosophy feel this too and get better with their information processing capabilities, so then they distribute among them who gets deeply specialized on each and every complex problem of humanity, like power dynamics dilemmas and armies redistribution.

I mean this is already happening, we have multiple humans specialized in very specific things or national conflicts, I just think that with a Cheerful attitude they will do their job better.

Empathetic and critical treatment among all of us will lead us all to that mutual benefit ending of the prisoner’s dilemma.

X.- Conclusion: Chapter-4.

Here are the key points of this chapter.

Cheerfulism with its focus on the fixed variable resolution technique and its happiness oriented nature, leads likely to an emphasis on peaceful and cooperative exploration and critique which will allow the humans (holding power or not) that adopt it to be more aware of the static-dynamic powers that govern their society. Thus having a better quality of its control and a better adaptable responsiveness to their bad decisions or decisions in general.

Creating a more robust society but at the same time flexible on its parts that adapts to changes as they come.

All these, leveraged with the new technologies of blockchain and artificial intelligence can lead to the greatest human peace this world has seen thanks to the optimization of our power dynamics.

This is the main point I’m trying to get across, adaptability based on cooperation and self-awareness is a core part of what I’m trying to reinforce or add to society and people’s lives. And now, with the technological advancements, it is more doable than ever before.

In this chapter I’ve explored possible Cheerful consequences on power dynamics. And, what I’m more confident about is that the transition or evolution can be carried out in a more peaceful way than ever before due to the explained principles Cheerfulism promotes plus our new technologies.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transition from Chapter 4 to Chapter 5

In the following chapter I will emphasize the use of “I believe”. Again, please notice, I’m saying I believe, I can’t affirm it, I don’t have the data. I think it is healthy, specially in nowadays times, to heavily reiterate on this: I’m tackling a problem with a Cheerful approach, but as mentioned long before, this doesn’t define what Cheerfulism thinks of socialism or libertarianism or any other -ism mentioned later. I reiterate, Cheerfulism is a base for thinking and living, and any conclusion people arrive at by applying it it’s not Cheerfulism itself.

As Cheerfulism would say:

Every conclusion is based on the system analyzed and they are meant to be changed if necessary.

A bunch of bad things have been done through history trying to apply philosophical knowledge without adapting it to the real-world’s specific circumstances. Cheerfulism can mitigate the damage when this pattern happens, not completely remove it though, because trial and error are intrinsic to humans.

Here is a little note on trial and error avoidance:

“We gotta look at the past sometimes to try understand our present path, but not for creating it. For that we should look at the present itself and think of the future. ”
(The author of this book, around 2022)

Now from power dynamics, once a nation is build and satisfies the natural needs of food, water and security, you need to find a way to allocate the rest of resources so everyone is satisfied, that is what next chapter is about. Let’s step into chapter 5.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
