- Existence of a State, a body that holds the monopoly on violence.

- Separation and independence from one another of the different capabilities of a State: to think (legislative), to act (executive), to observe and reason (judicial).

- Capability of a small amount of citizens to create their own completely independent power aspiring alternative.

- Capability for most of the citizens to do the previous creation act and to participate on the elections of the State.

Now, due to the sheer size of our societies, we need representatives. So, in practice, democracies in our societies need one more trait in their definition:

- Authentic representation through single-member elections in small electoral districts. Having the represented body the capability of firing the representative anytime.

In smaller societies, like the classical Athens from hundreds of years ago, there was no need for this last trait. People could vote directly, at least the ones who were allowed to do so. Simplified they were the adults, non-slave males with citizenship.

Anyway, the need for representatives creates a new relation of power between entities on the system: representative, represented.

As seen, any power relation can lead to abuse, so we must minimize it. And as seen too, decentralization and dynamism tend to work well given intelligent individuals.

So, via breaking down large societies in small electoral districts, we decentralize the solution. This helps as, in a small district, the power representative will see on the streets the represented ones, and thus, if something is abused, it can have real implications on his live with his neighbors. Real action, real reaction.

From the previous paragraph we can deduce that the represented must have lived and will live in the electoral district for some time as a requisite for the decentralization benefits to manifest.

The dynamism is added by the revocation capability. If the representative, at any time, can be taken away by the represented body, in case of abuse, it will be over soon. This dynamism allows for better adaptive tendencies and creates a natural break, a natural antagonistic force to the power which is temporarily delegated to the representative from the represented one. This helps the system re-balance and not to have an inertia towards centralization and static behavior.

The relation we have analyzed now is just 1 power relation pair in a democratic system. The representative-represented pair. But it is way more complex, there are more pairs to analyze:

- Executive, judicial.
- Executive, legislative.
- Executive, citizens.
- Judicial, legislative.
- Judicial, citizens.
- Legislative, citizens.
- Representatives, legislative.

All these pairs require intelligent design so to create a decentralized and dynamic system with good incentives that lead to minimal or no abuse.

All this is what Trevijano explores on his book while proposing real solutions to balance everything.

I do think that the concepts and technical details explained on that book should be understood by any human in the world.

Not only because, as explained, I aim for democracy, but because the only way for people to create a democracy is for them to know what a democracy truly is.

A lasting democracy, as explained, can only be created by intelligent enough people coordinating. Trevijano called this requirement: proceso de libertad constituyente (process of constituent freedom).

A process in which the great majority of a society is given freedom to chose and propose any possible future and, if chosen a democratic one, truly transition to a that regime.

The process has more details than that, I’m just explaining the overall ideas.

Trevijano explores lots of economical and political self-balancing structures to assure no abuse, or minimal abuse of power. And to assure that if it ever happens, it can be punished.

Some of the following only make sense assuming an intelligent knowledgeable population, the one a lasting democracy requires for its mere conception.

A non-exhaustive list of them are:

- Any political group can not receive any kind of private donation or public funding. It must only be funded by fixed quotas of their members.

- In electoral campaign, public advertisement will be illegal. Known public venues, like schools, will be the only places where political campaign acts will be possible. Each candidate must have the same amount of space and time to speak in each public venue.

- If the country becomes inoperable due to the legislative and executive powers clashing. They can destruct each other at the cost of destructing themselves and creating new elections for both.

- There can be no judge that is chosen by any other part of the other two State powers.

- The districts must be no bigger than 100.000 people.

- There must be separate elections for the executive and the legislative power.

- If someone is chosen in 1 of the branches of power of the State, he can not be in any other in the current mandate nor in the next one.

- If someone power holding person abuses power, that person is immediately kicked out and can not hold any kind of public role for X years (let’s say 15).

The book is really interesting, and the reasons on why these technicalities work independently and together to create a real democracy, in the sense that is real because it will last, are even more interesting too.

Please read it, it will take time and it is a hard read, but it is worth it. On the meanwhile, I’m working myself in the previously mentioned general constitution book that builds on top of Trevijano’s work and aims to even improve it and refine it.

X.- Conclusion: Section 8.2.

This is why I aim for democracy and this is what I mean by democracy. Remember, if you are reading this from a non-democratic country, like mine, as a general rule, do not rush too much.

I recommend not to panic. We have been working as oligarchracies or even dictatorships and we are not extinguished yet. Do not guide yourself by what you see on social media, it is all exaggerated, guide yourself by what you hear when talking and listening to your neighbors or real people in real time.

Getting there requires communication, education, thinking etc Mainly energy demanding cognitive actions. It takes time and effort. Specially more if the current power regime fights against it. A great effort with minimized chaos is required.

Remember, reject chaos. Chaotic protest are more likely to fail because they signal bad organization, and a bad organization won’t create any revolution towards the existing ones, specially if they have been there for a while already.

I understand that unfair situations awaken emotions and can lead to chaos. I’m just trying to friendly remind that that is not the best way and we should aim to master our rational selves to pull out the most intelligent and harder to carry out outcome.

Luckily there are ways so to the current powers fight less against a revolution or directly do not fight and even support it.

It is not easy at all, it can be impossible in some cases, but by all being Cheerful, power holding people and citizens, we can make it as real as it can actually be.

The goal is not to dethrone people and put new ones, the goal is not to get richer, the goal is to make everyone more intelligent so we can coordinate better and achieve greater and more lasting happiness via the creation and maintenance of every time more decentralized and dynamic protocols.

You can make that inside any power regime, with patience just by being a selfless teacher, educate people, yourself, try make them respectfully grow. And slowly and organically democracy should come.

This advise comes from what I am observing in my country. In Spain we had a dictatorship long ago, 1939-1978. When the dictator died then we transitioned to an oligarcracy, yet due to: reasons, the people were brainwashed into thinking it is a democracy. The thing is that this transition was peaceful, because it was not a drastic change.

The transition to a more decentralized system did not come fully from within, external nations, with more decentralized and dynamic power mechanics, influenced with economical pressure for example, on Spain’s “democratic” transition.

Despite this, I think with an intelligent enough population, like a Cheerful population, a nation can still transition to a more decentralized and dynamic system without the need of international interests influencing.

The thing is that now, slowly but surely, lots of people are realizing that Spain is not a democracy and why exactly that is. Knowledgeable people have been explaining why for decades, Trevijano himself was alive and on exile when the dictatorship and did not stop preaching that Spain was an oligarcracy and not a democracy until he died.

As a curious observation, maybe, if we do not want more wars, we might have to pass through a period of oligarcracies when coming from dictatorships in order to transition to democracies. It makes sense, as this transition is smoother and less prone to trauma and tension. 

In Spain, agnostic to public money, associations of citizens are peacefully preaching how we should change the entire political system, from its deepest roots, the constitution and all, to make it a true democracy.

It truly seems like, we can transition to decentralized and dynamic systems without the need for wars. We just have to be patient selfless teachers.

That is what I meant with no rush, big changes require drastically different actions, which, if you are not intelligent enough, they can easily lead to uncontrolled chaos that does more bad than good.

I do not recommend drastic actions, but I get that, if survival is not granted, they are not an option but just an impulse, an instinct.

I know that some oppressive regimes will have killed families and other horrendous stuff. Repeating myself, when survival is not granted, Cheerfulism requires a miracle to be triggered.

I wish the best of lucks to the most extreme circumstances. Yet please do not forget, at the end of the day, we should land in a place where the idea of “the other” does not exist. Where the thing that exists is “another me” or “my neighbor”. At personal levels and international levels.

8.3.- The best way forward I can think of: CDL.

Finally, after explaining all these details, I can propose the way forward for all societies.

So, by being Cheerful, by living abiding as much as I could by the human axioms, here is what I concluded to be the best way we can manage to exist as a society. Feel free to frame it from another angle of reality, I would love to read that.

The answer is CDL. Which stands for:

Cheerfulism, Democracy and Libertarianism.

I think the members of this triad balance each other beautifully. I will dare to say perfectly.

There is a deep trait that is always present in effective solutions that we humans have thought of. We saw this in the power dynamics coordination problem, the resource management problem and the educational problem. The common trait is:

Decentralizing variable handling, a.k.a. problem solving, to proven intelligent individuals.

The 3 components of CDL strongly aligns a society to this principle in some way or another.

Let’s understand why CDL works well by understanding the individual weaknesses of its parts.

Democracy’s failure is: What the majority decides might just not be a good decision. The same way individuals can take bad decisions, societies can too in a democracy.

Libertarianism’s failure is: A free human does not really exist and therefore it can still abuse others and take bad decisions.

So just by these 2 protocols we are still not optimizing for the minimization of abuse or optimization of happiness.

For precisely that we need Cheerfulism. Cheerful individuals are less likely to take bad decisions due to their focus on maximizing intelligence. Furthermore it naturally leads to less abuse. This is because intelligent individuals realize that they must live with others, and they can also realize that cooperation over competition or conflict is a less chaotic, easier to manage, solution on the long term.

Sure, if they are too dumb, they can just not be capable of realizing this and abuse will occur. There is always that theoretical and statistical risk. Personally, as per personal experience, most people do realize that cooperation is better than conflict in the long term. Otherwise frequent street fights would be normalized in all around the globe. Yet there is a big chunk of it where frequent normalized street fights do not happen. Signaling that this is just ignorance leading to poor coordination. Or other controllable abuse sources instead of uncontrollable ones like dumbness or psychopathy.

If uncontrollable sources of abuse were the main cause of violence on the world then violence would exist everywhere, it would be the norm in each street. But it does not, so it can be controlled to some extent, thereby we should maximize for that.

Another negative point for democracy and libertarianism is that they are harder to implement because they require more complex systems created and maintained by a higher collective intelligence. Cheerfulism also balances that by promoting the maximization of each person’s intellectual capabilities.

Continuing, libertarianism and democracy are the most capable protocols for allowing the decentralization of variable handling to intelligent individuals, which tends to better outcomes. Each in their respective fields or problems, these are economy and politics.

But, as another missing trait of these two protocols, none says anything about how to create intelligent individuals. Cheerfulism does.

Let’s keep naming weak spots. Democracy and libertarianism guide people with the goal and premise of a future with more freedom. But freedom was never the desire at the deepest core of human nature.

More fragile becomes the soul of a group without a goal that is really shared and biological, that is what Cheerfulism is for too. To guide ourselves towards a goal we will always share, the goal of happiness.

Nonetheless, I want to clarify that it is not one or the other, it is which one should we prioritize and use as the main guidance.

I think a better engine, a better core principle that leads to more human well-being can be reached if we focus mainly on happiness and not on freedom, because it is more natural and its search is always real, all the time, regardless.

Sure, only after survival is granted. But freedom operates in the same way, no-one seeks freedom when they starve, they seek food. I’m assuming granted survival as said earlier.

People gather and party together, they bond together, because they are ultimately feeling happy, not because they are feeling free. Freedom can make you feel happy, and that is why we ultimately like it and can get addicted to it. Not vice-versa.

Any source of happiness brings the risk of addiction with it. Some are easier to fall into, some are harder, but all do bring the risk. This is another reason why we must not ignore the intelligence part.

Regardless of freedom seekers or protection seekers, if you seek happiness, you can talk to both and they will not perceive you as the other, because you have common ground. Because happiness is a deeper shared truth, it can help us coordinate with less conflict too.

As a metaphor for this. Libertarianism and socialism are a couple that broke up due to misunderstandings and lack of communication lead arguments. Cheerfulism would be the common friend who still hangs out with both, which is listened by and listens to both, and has the capability of fixing the relationship in the future.

When we guide ourselves based on deeper principles that always hold, we can reach deeper understandings and reach greater goals by crafting more effective and complex solutions. And for successful guidance, regardless of what is the core you choose, regardless of freedom or happiness, you have to mix it with the maximization of intelligence for optimal well-being and being able to handle chaos and uncertainty, which conform risk. Cheerfulism is both, happiness and intelligence.

Ultimately I’m not libertarian and seek to maximize freedom, I’m Cheerful and I seek to maximize intelligence and optimize happiness, I can only think and reason through deeper principles when I think of happiness, and that, overall, leads to more understanding that has greater potential of prosperity.

As a scientific parallelism, some Einstein equations can be “simplified” logically and correctly into Newton’s ones. This doe not mean Newton is always wrong, the same way in which putting individual freedom at the core is not always wrong, it just means that Einstein’s equations hold true for a larger set of reality’s contexts. Happiness focus would be Einstein, Newton would be freedom focus. However, you need to be intelligent to discover and use any of them.

Concluding with my favoritism to Cheerfulism, because action (power) and means (resources) are nothing without a deeply shared goal (happiness). And because failure awaits us in the future if we do not think and adapt (intelligence).

These are the reasons why we need to add Cheerfulism to this triad.

A triangle shaped engine of action, representing the self-balancing principle it leads to: CDL.

But hey, let’s not rush, we still have to talk about the weakness of Cheerfulism. It has an unavoidable flaw: We can still make mistakes, we can still take bad decisions.

That is why I always repeat, it is all statistics, we can not assure success, just optimize for its likelihood to be greater. That is what CDL aims for.

Also, if resources are truly limited, then survival instincts kick-in, critical thinking gets kicked-off and Cheerfulism is turned-off.

That is why, even if there is a fight for survival-related resources, we must not forget, that after the fight, CDL is what we must strive to achieve.

8.3.1.- How to transition to CDL.

There are 7 possible combinations of current societies as per if they follow CDL or not.

These are the 3 different variables:

- Cheerful or not Cheerful.
- Democratic or not democratic.
- Libertarian or not libertarian.

All possible starting points are:

1.- Cheerful, Not-Democratic, Libertarian.
2.- Cheerful, Democratic, Not-Libertarian.
3.- Cheerful, Not-Democratic, Not-Libertarian.
4.- Not-Cheerful, Democratic, Libertarian.
5.- Not-Cheerful, Not-Democratic, Libertarian.
6.- Not-Cheerful, Democratic, Not-Libertarian.
7.- Not-Cheerful, Not-Democratic, Not-Libertarian.

The ideal transitions are the ones the image that follows shows.

In red you will see the harder to change states and harder to change transitions, in yellow, less hard to change ones, and in green, the easiest ones and the end goal:



I think these are the best paths to follow, and now I will explain why.

I think the best first step is for a society to become Cheerful. Because Cheerful individuals adapt better, which will only facilitate the other possible transition steps.

You can see that the process requires at most 3 steps and, as little, 1 step. The goal is to all states, all circles, to follow these arrows and reach the green state: CDL.

Furthermore, as per their intelligence and happiness oriented action, Cheerful individuals do not like chaos and tend not to create it, as it is harder to control and live through. If it is unavoidable or mistakes are taken as per human nature, chaos will arise or be chosen though.

Even in that case, in the case of conflict, they are the best enemies you can have. As their traits naturally lead them to minimize abuse, thus revenge is less likely or less severe.

After a Cheerful transition, then I think the best next step is a democratic transition. This is a complex topic that will be addressed later in the chapter.

Wether you come from oligarchic power dynamics or dictatorial ones, it is likely that powerful individuals will have abused their power. So transitioning to a system where they have less can be scary to them. How to deal with it was covered in chapter 4. In part, as mentioned there, a transition through education is the safest bet for abusive powerful-ones. Thus this is another reason why understanding the system of education, chapter 6, is so vital.

The reasons on why aiming for transitioning to a democracy where explained in chapter 4 and 7.2.

And finally, the last step, a transition to libertarianism.

I do not think libertarianism is possible under non-democratic regimes. At least not for more than short time periods. This is because oligarchies and small groups of individuals can always be bribed every now and then by wealthy enough individuals or groups. Bribery is an act that can lead to abuse. Abuse creates chaos and that makes intelligent adaptation more difficult.

A non-democratic and libertarian system would be one where money moves very freely and power does too, which, by natural inertia in similar ways of those explained in previous sections, those two forces, instead of clashing against each other, will just tend to go in the same direction because it is easier: centralization, static behavior, thus lack of adaptation, and eventually abuse. Sure, exceptions can happen, but exceptions are.

The reasons on why aiming for transitioning to libertarianism were explained in chapter 5.

And as seen, changes, of any kind, are better done and handled through education. Specially education aligned with human nature. For that refer to all explained in chapter 6.

Note that the graph presented is incomplete, of course a country can go from state 7 to state 5 for example. For simplicity, I’ve just drawn and explained the ones which I think are the best transitions.

I could draw all transitions from all states and argue against why those are not the best, but that would be a total of 28 transitions to analyze. I will leverage my laziness and encourage you to train your engineer’s thinking by analyzing them.

For example, the one mentioned from state 7 to state 5. I think it is less optimal because it would naturally would go back to state 7. For the reason explained above, a libertarian not-democratic regime does not last long. Thus it would go back to state 7: non-libertarian, non-democratic.

We could further complete the graph with diversifying the not-something tags. Like instead of not-democratic, specifying: dictatorship or oligarchic. Instead of not-libertarian specifying: socialist, communist, anarchist. Instead of Cheerful: any other predominant philosophy.

If we do this, we would have a graph where every single society on earth would belong to one of its nodes. And then, each person, according to their situation would just have to optimize the path to reach the green CDL node.

An advice that arose from personal observation. If your country is a dictatorship, it is harder to transition directly to a democracy, it might be less chaotic to first transition to an oligarchy and then to a democracy. If you want to do drastic changes then you must make sure all your society is intelligent enough, otherwise you will get chaos and either not create a transition or even move in the opposite direction.

I hope all of you think about this, on your society, and where it fits on the graph and what is the optimal path to reach the CDL. I’ve done it for mine.

8.3.2.- A factor is missing in the name: Education.

CDL is missing an E. Which stands for EBTAA, the already mentioned in earlier chapters, Education Based on Trust Accountability and Adaptation.

In any kind of transition from a non-CDL state to a more aligned CDL state, you nee change, and the key of effective and efficient change, as seen is learning, educating.

Wether in the transition from non-libertarian to libertarian, from non-Cheerful to Cheerful, or from non-democratic to democratic, an effective and efficient education is vital.

Specially in the power dynamics part of the triad, as explained in the world peace chapter, abuse can not be deleted, just minimize, the education of future generations plays a crucial role in the most optimal and realistic technique for transitioning from one power protocol that likely had abuse to another one where power is more decentralized. This was the technique of temporary clearly pretended ignorance.

And as explained in the education chapter and as highlighted on chapter, humanity is facing a challenge which is that most of people are too lazy to train their brains. This has similar barriers than the ones people have to not start physical training. And, the best way to create a habit, which is what training ultimately is, is to teach it during the early years of a human.

When people get older, change, training, gets harder, thus getting used to it at early stages in life is essential.

So, even if education, and specially EBTAA is not in the name. It is inside CDL. CDL can only be possible when people have trained their brains. Which is easily achieved if starting in early stages of life, done properly through an EBTAA based education.

8.3.3.- The international factor influence on the transition.

All said it is fine in a national context, however in international landscapes, this ideal transition paths presented might not be possible.

Because some nations depend on abusing others, therefore, they will likely not help, in fact they might even put impediments towards other nations that are being abused so to transition either to Cheerfulism, democracies or libertarian protocols, because if they succeed on the mission, those abused nations will be way harder to abuse. And the abusive nation will lose all the good it was getting from the abuse.

As seen in the abuse section, abusers might abuse because of 2 reasons: lack of intelligence due to stupidity or dumbness which leads to them unable to figure out better less abusive or maybe even non-abusive ways of interacting with you, or, because of he abuser thinking he is capable of controlling you without generating uncontrollable chaos on the process.

This matter is a complex one. Because the factors that affect the eventual action of a nation abusing another are very varied. For example, a nation might accidentally abuse another one because they vote a government that has a very aggressive international attitude, however maybe the voters did not intend that and they are not capable of realizing it because they are focused on other matters which are perceived with a higher priority than international actions.

The abusive action might not even have a voting mechanism and the decision is dependent on a small group of oligarchs which might overestimate their capabilities of abuse etc.

Regardless of the configuration and the entity who decides to abuse, the fundamental drivers of the abuse are the 2 reasons explained.

I could get theoretical again and analyze every combinations. But that would take likely triplicating the length of this book, in my opinion, unnecessarily.

As per my current understanding, I think most of the international abuse happens is driven with the strongest force by the scenario of people being to cognitively busy with other topics rather than international dilemmas.

I’m talking specially a very specific nation which is clearly starting to see and feel the limits of biting more than it can chew, trying to control by force and corruption others. However, as said, names do not matter, what matter is understanding.

I’m aware that in the international landscape some nations won’t be able to transition ideally to CDL, even if they so desire, due to external abuse. However, if the abuser transitions to CDL, the abuse applied externally will be reduced, as more intelligent individuals will be able to solve their current tensions better.

And in scenarios of less tension, arises trust and clarity, which further promotes finding middle ground of agreement that reduces abuse.

These chains of thought resemble a lot the ones in the world peace chapter. Because they are based on the same realistic fundamental dynamics.

So, as with world peace, if we want our society to move towards CDL we can not just logically wait for it to happen, we must strive for it. And if we all strive for it at the same time, mutual understanding will be maximized.

8.3.2.- CDL applied to Spain.

How could it be otherwise, because I’m Spanish and I know this society better than any other, here I will showcase an example of a manifesto for the Spanish population on how I think  they should transition to CDL.

For context, Spain is economically socialist and politically an oligarcracy. Philosophically, to be honest, I do not really know. People do not seem to have a main train of thought, as modern artists say, this is the remix.

We do actually have strong christian religious values roots and influence though, even though its practice has weakened a lot, philosophy wise we are sort of aligned with that.

Anyway, unless a religion or predominant philosophy is strongly opposed of making people more intelligent, which does not seem to be the case on Spanish one, transitioning to Cheerfulism should just be compatible with any other predominant philosophy or religion.

A very strong feature of Cheerfulism is that, because it is so aligned with human nature, it does not really matter with which other religion or philosophy has to coexist with. Cheerfulism does not deny, negate or censor their existence, it just supports them and dances along with them. Just as the image at the beginning of the chapter.

This same reasoning also applies to economical, political or educational adaptations.

Given this context on Spain and the viability analysis of Cheerfulism on it, this could be some action principles based on CDL for Spain:

CDL - Spain
(Cheerfulism, Democracy and Libertarianism)

1.
Spain should adopt Cheerfulism as a guiding philosophy.

2.
Spain should transition to a true democracy.
CDL defines democracy as the system that adheres to the three principles established by Antonio García-Trevijano on his work "Teoría Pura de la República":

- Separation of the three powers of government at their origin.

- Authentic representation through single-member elections in small electoral districts.

- Collective political freedom as the foundation of the system.

3.
Spain should move toward a strongly libertarian economic system.
CDL defines libertarianism as the next step of centralization beyond anarchism. In a libertarian society, public money exists but is kept to the minimum necessary to fund a public army that enforces the law. Individuals have private money and may use it freely to organize resources, as long as they do not break the law.

4.
Every point described here is a recommendation. CDL does not impose change, it recommends it, specially via education. It believes that the most prosperous change comes from conviction, not coercion.

5.
Spain’s education should be based on the principles of EBTAA: Education based on trust, accountability and adaptation.

6.
The points above are based on logical reasoning inferred from human biology: a human being
always strives to be happy, and to succeed in that task it is essential to cooperate intelligently with one's neighbors.

Cooperation requires a balance of power that prevents, as much as physically possible, one
neighbor from abusing another. Therefore, a democratic system is recommended. The imperfection of democracy is summed up by the phrase: “If the people are foolish, foolish things will be decided.” Hence, CDL also promotes the philosophy of Cheerfulism as a counterbalance to this weakness.

To understand happiness and to maximize human intelligence, one must understand the
Cheerfulist philosophy.

And for the most efficient allocation of resources, it is recommended to combine this with an
economic system that strongly tends toward libertarianism. It must be emphasized that this system is not perfect, and just as the branches of power check and balance one another in a democracy, the inefficiencies and contradictions of libertarianism are counterbalanced by democracy and by the Cheerful citizens. Thus, CDL aims to coordinate the three fundamental pillars of any society. In this case, the Spanish society: mind (processing and analysis of information), force (the body’s action), and organization (coordination of information into action).

All this transition catalyzed by the usage of an EBTAA educational system and attitude. One that promotes a revenge minimized transition and habits to maintain the effort required to order the existing and potential chaos.

6.
CDL recommends these principles of action to every known human society, adapting the transition process described in point 7 to the social reality in each case.

7.
In the Spanish case, CDL recommends the following transition from the current system to the
proposed one:

- First: Emphasize Cheerfulism, to clarify the goals and principles of action. At the same time, introduce to the people the understanding of EBTAA.

- Second: Emphasize achieving real democracy, so that Cheerful individuals may begin to act using their fullest potential and power decentralization is carried out with minimal cycles of hate.

- Last: Emphasize the pros and cons of the libertarian economic model, so that, in a democratic system with a Cheerful mindset, its implementation may begin.

- The transition is recommended to be as peaceful as possible through temporary clearly pretended ignorance towards the disastrous acts of the current oligarchies. These are the political class and any individual which its monetary income depends fully on the State and the wasting or inefficient spending of public funds.

Hatred leads to chaos, and in chaos, prosperity is hindered. However, violence is sometimes inevitable by nature, and punishment of the clearly abusive faction of the oligarchy will occur if society so demands.

Still, CDL strongly recommends avoiding such punishment, although it will not actively work to stop it if it unfolds.

In the case of a transition from the Spanish Oligarchic system to a democratic one, the usage of temporary clearly pretended ignorance (TCPA) would make sense.

As per Trevijano’s analysis, since real democracy can only arise from absolute social conviction and action, TCPA is doable in a democratic transition because the same strong conviction and action is required for succesfully executing TCPA. 

However, due to Spain’s population size, as TCPA only minimizes revenge, any famous oligarch related to known corruption cases is at risk of a minority hunting him or her. Maybe even at risks of being killed because of their accumulated negligence cases through the decades which have actually caused real deaths. Like in the recent 2024 DANA floodings in Valencia’s territory.

Due to Spain’s great levels of debt, spending more money on the protection of these individuals is discouraged and exile is the cheapest option. Either way, the oligarchs holding fame related to negligence or corruption must be either protected or exiled to abide by TCPA and create the less chaos possible.

8.
CDL has no leader.

Although it was created by Spanish citizen Carlos Alegre Urquizú, CDL is a set of ideas intended to transform Spanish society by winning what is popularly known as the cultural battle. Thus, the figure of the creator holds no power over the ideas once they are explained.

As long as a person defends these eight points, they may consider themselves part of CDL, regardless of any other factor.

Any political or other organization created to promote CDL’s principles must clearly state that it is not CDL. For example, if the creator were to found a political party, its name should reflect that it is a personification of the ideas, not the ideas themselves: e.g. CDL-PP (Cheerfulness, Democracy, Liberty – Political Party).

If that party ultimately fails to adhere to these principles, CDL will remain unaffected, as it is a set of ideas and not a physical being nor collective.

This distinction is intended to help citizens foster critical thinking and debate about ideas themselves, rather than about the people trying to apply them. In this way, society is encouraged to focus on goals and clear methods to achieve them, and thus they are less likely to elevate any leader or leaders into a fanaticism based tyranny.

X.- Conclusion: Chapter 8.

This chapter marks the end of part 2 of the book. Here I’ve connected, polished and summarized all the ideas and analysis on what I think it can happen if we manage to become Cheerful.

The rest is up to you.

Will you be willing to train your mind? Will you be willing to understand happiness and realize what patterns bring it to you?

Will you be able to combine both in order to figure out ways to get them in an abuse minimized way? Will you contribute to world peace? Will you dance? Will you clash?

Will you selflessly help others on the way? Will you do it with friends? Will you find new friends? Will you teach and be taught by friends?

Will you need no extra money? Will you need more money? Will you need less? Will you need more health? Will you need more freedom?

Will you smile? Will you cry? Will you find lasting happiness?

There is only one way of knowing, and that is trying.

Go learn, get the habit, start with the curricula presented in the book if you will, start learning this book itself if you will, criticize it please, burn it to intellectual ashes if you can, or get convinced by it if you find it reasonable, adapt CDL to your country’s situation, whatever, just do it, learn, explore, seek happiness.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transition from Part 2 to Part 3.

The following part of the book is meant to strengthen all explanations given so far by giving more details on the reasons behind the specific wording used.

I will also give more details on how this book has bee written and who I am. This is so you can better see any possible biases I might have.

This third part is meant for those who seek depth and do not mind going into more complex reasoning. If you are just a normal casual reader trying to understand concepts in this book, don’t worry if you don’t fully grasp this third part.

In fact, what I would love you to do, is to think about all read, write down questions about things you do not understand or things you think I’m wrong about. Well, as you might have noticed, I’m proposing it again, to use the thinking like an engineer process to analyze the book so far and then, after you have found your useful answers, proceed reading this part.

In this more detailed part you will find answers to why I chose certain words and what details they encapsulate. And then maybe those details answer your questions, or make you understand all better, or even proof me right or wrong against any of your initial doubts about anything written so far.

So yeah, I think it might be more enriching to first analyze this book like an engineer and then read this part.

Anyway, if you are too curious, or too lazy, or you just want to read: Welcome to part 3! :)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

