10.- About understanding metaphysics. Is there anything real? Is there anything not real?

Before reading this chapter that defies the limits of human cognitive capabilities I must clarify something again. Cheerfulism is a practical philosophy, I stated very clear that it does not intent on entering the metaphysical realm of thought, when I defined freedom in the first chapters I added a note about this.

This is because, from my life experience, I deem metaphysics as a fun but with little to no use thought process. Good to realize our limits, yet bad due to being very inefficient or with a tendency for being inefficient to get us food and be actually useful in direct surviving or thriving.

It can be fun for a bit, but then you end up on a loop, and tell me who likes repetitive stuff forever, or who survives doing the same over and over again forever? No-one. That is why I think it is of little to no use basically.

Yet metaphysics is needed given certain societies size in order too coordinate people, societies considering metaphysics is a great sign. It means they are bored enough and surviving enough so to even test their natural limits on intelligence.

Because of this key yet kinda useless nature, boring is in my opinion, and thus this chapter appears so late in the book. But some people care about it, so here I include it in the book, what did a Cheerful individual once thought about metaphysics?

Here it is. And as always, this is what me, being Cheerful, concluded. Not the truth. Again Cheerfulism is about learning about ourselves so to guide ourselves towards happiness. Apply it on your own, reach your own conclusions.

This one is mine, reached via a Cheerful mind. Let’s start with the story that made me include this on the book.

10.1.- Friends discussing religion ends up in metaphysics. How I deal with the latter.

While I was playing public pianos around Barcelona with my friends we sat in a circle, relaxed, after playing some music. Then we started discussing about religion. Because there was a Christian, a Muslim and a Rastafari, he said, whatever that is, he didn’t specify much about it. All of those were my friends and friends of each other. We were curious and trying to discover the world. And then it was me, someone who none of them could understand.

My view? I just don’t care, I don’t even try to care. I told them how all their discussions about gods and history are just, stories, not science. They might be true, or false, we can’t know. And as I can’t scientifically know, and as I don’t need it to be happy, I just do not care.

I told them, I think you are wrong in thinking you can know the truth. I would tell this very same thing to an atheist who denies the existence of any god. We just can’t know I told them, and the fact of anyone daring to say it is true (believers), or it is false (atheist, deniers), if anyone dares to state any of these, they will be scientifically wrong. As none of the answers is scientific.

One of them asked me: Okay then tell me, did Cristobal Colon discovered America? I said: “I can not really know, I can only believe that story. And to be honest, I don’t care about it. Stories are stories, just because they are repeated all across the globe, that does not make them 100% true.”

After a bunch more of witty questions, more arguments, counter arguments etc they asked me, but what then? What created the creation? Then I realized, and I told them, this is metaphysics, a sort of useless philosophy branch. They had no idea what metaphysics was, so I tried to explain them that is the philosophy of thinking about what is to be and what is not to be. Which our brains just can’t do successfully, it is our current cognitive limit. I told them  you can’t define to be or not to be, thus you can’t define or not define god.

Okay prepare your logical reasoning and focus reading the next paragraph.

They were shocked and laughing, but bro, how can you just not define stuff? They just could not understand, they said, there must be something, a god, being the first definition. And then I asked them again, well but that can be contradictory if… etc etc Creating this classic self-reference loop of trying to define the cause of the first cause, because if it has a cause, it is not the first cause. And wait nothing can just appear otherwise you are defining there was nothing before that, wait, then nothing is the cause of something, so it is not the first thing that existed then, then nothing is the first thing that existed no? We are naming nothing, so it exists no? Wasn’t nothing not to exist? Wait this is contradictory, by definition nothing is something that is not, but we are saying it is something, it is not to be, what so then… it actually is? Not to be is the same as to be? And so on and so forth.

Feel free to continue this loop in your mind, it always looks like you found an answer and then there is always a way to counter it. I’ve done it for hours in my life, and I realized, okay, this is boring and kinda useless. 

After all this conversation one told me, you are crazy, in a friendly way. And another was like, I really want to understand what you say but I can’t, fascinated yet denying that I was right, if I am right of course.

So, here it is, to all of you and my fascinated friend, which I hope will one day read this, my best try at explaining how I face and live or deal with the impossibility of metaphysics. I do so by reading or thinking the following:

10.1.1.- Dealing with metaphysics.

There is nothing more stupid than just to be or not be. The second more stupid thing is to justify as real or scientific non-scientific stuff. The third most stupid thing is thinking that scientific stuff is not stupid...

The forth is thinking, oh and talking, okay it is the second. Okay there is nothing more stupid than trying to define truth and falseness.

Okay I got it, there is nothing more stupid than being and or not being and… Wait what? I am confused, this feels like a loop.

For the people who are so deeply and crazy philosophical than can’t take Cheerfulism because they cant find the meaning of metaphysics and to be or not to be. Here is how you do it:

The same way rocks can rock without us caring about rock-ing, we can we without caring about we-ing.

But don’t worry, nature will distract you with thinking and stuff around you. Flow, feel, try to be happy. But don't think too often about what that means, it is futile, whatever that futile means too. And whatever whatever is, and whatever is is, and so forth and so on, whatever that is. And here we go again, whatever that is, and

You see? Loop, useless, if you kept like that and did not eat you would die. So go eat, go feel happiness and that is it. Is it? Yes let’s fix that variable, can we though? Damn, loop again. Stop. We have to stop at some point or we can not function as humans, we use the fixed variable resolution technique, not the ever variable resolution technique.

Oh, and the paragraph than ended in 'and', it is not a coincidence. I did it because,        cant     write neither I can think about          , so how am I gonna             . Ah shit I can’t even name it, how useless no? How repetitive.

So, better, read this in a loop, from the rocks phrase, for hours, and you will naturally do what you are supposed to, which is finding food, survive, and then try to be happy. You are not supposed to always care about metaphysics, are you? Whatever that is, now go read the first paragraphs about rocks again, see you in a bit. Oh and if you are here for a second or whatever time and you are hungry or sick of this. Just keep existing, whether that is continuing this book or going to eat something...

Mixing some phrases said by Master Oogway, from KungFu Panda: “You are too concern with what it was and what will be. You must let go of the illusion of control. The past is history, the future is a mystery, but today, today it is a gift, that is why it is called present.”

X.- Conclusion: Chapter 10.

So. Fuck metaphysics and let’s eat some tasty food together until we feel like “metaphysiching” again. Oh and please avoid fighting over metaphysics, you risk starving.

The same way rocks can rock without caring about rock-ing, we can we without caring about we-ing.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transition from chapter 10 to chapter 11.

Let’s step away from our cognitive limits for now, and let me tell you a story to link and understand the reason of why I decided to add the following chapter.

Years ago I thought about the following question, but as I deemed it very useless, or of little usefulness, I thought: yeah let’s just first write up all the really useful stuff and I will write and think about this latter.

That day has finally come, I’m writing and starting thinking about this in 2025.

The question is, if Cheerfulism is for humans? Is it for dogs? Is it for cyborgs? Is it for any kind of living creature? Any futuristic creature too, like cyborgs, genetically modified humans etc? Hell, even for robots with no biological base as we understand it today.

As I mentioned in chapter 7 I started reading books to see how people understand the world and to see if it fits with Cheerfulism, to see if whether they actually support it or destroy anything on part 1, the real core, the real Cheefulism.

One of these books was Sapiens by Yuval Noah Harari, where he analyzes human history and what he thinks we can learn from all of it. Which by the way, at the end he mentions it is time we start thinking about happiness… What a coincidence! I started reading this book because a friend named Iván read Cheerfulisim v0.0.3 and said that it reminded him a bit of Sapiens and that I should read that book. So I did. Again this further reinforces the fact that Cheerfulism creates itself and evolves itself, by reading others, talking to friends, exploring…

These two books ar deeply related in the way that they try to help humans make sense of themselves and to create a sort of felling of “we all belong to the same thing”, the same race.

So, I read it, and one of the thoughts it sparked on me was the revival of this abandoned question I’ve mentioned. Which, curiously enough, another of my friends, Keenan, who also read a big chunk of Cheerfulism v0.0.3, had had the same questions for a while. Now he is writing a sort of: Guide to the good being, he told me. Then I was like, wow, feels like destiny is telling me to finally start thinking about this. So I did.

And on the way I will showcase once again how to tackle a question, a problem, thinking like an engineer as per chapter 3. A very complex one I might say. I do not aim to completely answer it though, maybe I will do that in a future version. If I manage to learn more deeply something and showcase my thought process it will be more than useful enough for this version of the book.

Let this chapter be a proof of the attitude, of the curiosity driven research, even if it is something I know nothing about, let it be a reference so anyone dares to tackle even the more unknown and unfamiliar questions.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

