12.- FAQ: Boring details on definitions, alternatives and extreme cases.

This final chapter will be dedicated to the nuances on all said. Questions of the following nature: why did I use this wording? Why not this alternative? If you understand X like that, how do you make sense of Y? What about this extreme situation, does this still apply?

Along the book I’ve been mentioning on top of which assumptions I was reasoning through, and even explored alternatives if we get those assumptions false. For example when talking about democracy and State existence whereas some people defend the anarchism protocol.

I realized by talking to people who read previous versions of this book that some stuff might not be explained as obviously as I thought. Or that it might not have lead to the obvious conclusions I expected. Indeed this section is a sort of FAQ (frequent asked questions) section.

Hopefully, it can give you more context on how I thought and it might even help you to answer or try to understand how I would have answered any question that might have arose on your head.

So, here are more boring yet nice, in my opinion, details.

12.1.- Details on: Part 1.

12.1.1.- Why not to include health as a core pillar of happiness? You do need survival first. Doesn’t survival require health?

Technically no, obese people are not healthy and still can survive, thanks to society, indeed, but still they survive. A good bunch of elderly people are not considered healthy and are not autonomous, yet they survive.

From an individual, and unreal, point of view, yes, it should be included. Yet we are social animals, we can’t survive alone naked in nature say it that way. I was writing from that actually real, social point of view.

Notice that in the image I presented, relationships are encompassing both, the entertainment need and the survival need, not health.

We can get picky and say: You need to be alive! That requires a minimum of health.

Okay, fine, then you need a good enough help, that would be indeed the correct affirmation. Yet I guess, we all can understand and deduce this little details by now.

Remember, do not take my words as truth, question every detail, every word, if you want to. :)

I also thought that health is not really a natural core goal of humans, at least after granted survival, because people, everyday, mess up their health just for the sake of trying to feel happiness, like with drug consumption.

So if I want to connect with the deepest and strongest desires, I should not put those that do not apply to all.

12.1.2.- Don’t you need intelligence to survive?

We have stupid people alive, we clearly do not require it. Again, like with health, yes you need a minimal intelligence.

Be picky if you want, or curious. As long as we are understanding each other it is enough to thrive.

12.1.3.- Why is not doing what you want to do included or even mentioned in the happiness definition?

Because it is not at the core of happiness. Happiness is just the chemical reward to promote exploration and execution of certain patterns every now and then.

You can be forced by socioeconomic conditions to work as a waiter in a bar from your hood let’s say, yet you enjoy talking to people and moving, so even if you are forced you can still feel happy.

There is a chance that you can still be happy even if forced. That is why it is not at its core. But indeed, if you are forced that can mean that that is not what your chemical reactions are telling you to do, which can lead to not being happy. But it is just a can, not something assured.

I wanted to keep the core of happiness as certain and applicable to all cases as possible.

12.1.5.- Why haven’t you mentioned love?

Because it is a type of relationship. And I’ve mentioned the relationships factor. The details on how they are defined are not relevant to the general core of happiness we all share.

How to define them, understand them and feel them is personal. It is linked to how we will achieve happiness though.

So giving my point of view on topics like friendship or love relationships falls out of the scope of this book. As it is part of the individual journey and not part of the general direction.

Even though I briefly mentioned different love protocols like monogamy and poliamory, it was not with the intention of defining them, it was just as a showcase of how people can think of the same ideas, and reach similar conclusions, even if fixing different variables.

12.1.6.- What happens when someone you love dies? Then intelligence and happiness just do not matter. Does Cheerfulism still hold?

This is a very interesting question my friend Eloi asked me.

When someone you loved dies, it is like a part of you died, thus we are again in the starting point, guaranteeing survival. So all techniques and concepts based on statistical survival do not apply. It is a shock, an extreme, and even though you are alive, part of you is not.

Can you be Cheerful when someone loved dies? I do not think so. That action triggers responses similar to survival ones.

Fortunately, we live in a society which can protect and support us until we are slowly reborn.

I have no idea if the process of healing from someone’s death are hard coded in our genes. But what is sure is that when death related threats or acts are happening, Cheerfulism does not hold.

Because to be happy you need to feel like your life is safe, and someone you love dying clearly signals that a part of you was not safe anymore.

Death is a tough individual punch, fortunately it can not KO Cheerfulism because we are neighbors, societal beings, not isolated individuals.

We can support each other on those moments where one of us loses its cheerfulness.

12.1.7.- Intelligence requires effort, and it is required to have a fulfilling and sustainable degree of happiness, why not centering the philosophy on intelligence?

I think you can rewrite this whole book with that other cornerstone and it would be correct.

Yet I didn’t do it.

First it was because I’m not like this, I tend more to have fun than to try to be intelligent. And I think most people have this tendency too. That is why pleasure and addictions are so tempting and easy to fall into but hard to get back from.

I chose happiness as the core leading goal because it is easier for all of us to understand and thus to use it for creating a human unity, regardless of who you are.

No matter where you go, you will understand that feeling of smiling. Yet the “feeling of intelligence” is harder to describe and quickly share, it requires effort, words even. Not all of us speak the same language. But we all can easily smile and laugh.

So, I chose it because I’m like this and because it felt more natural and straightforward. 

Furthermore, effort can also lead to chemical happiness rewards. It might be delayed gratification, yet still gratification.

It just feels like everything points to happiness. Even though both are tightly correlated and at the deepest core of human prosperity, happiness is the one at the deepest level.

12.1.8.- Why is how quickly you achieve a goal not included in the definition of intelligence?

It is indirectly included, the definition says: “… the longer the time the goal is achieved, the more intelligent”.

If 2 people have the same problem, and one solves it at 3:00 am and the other at 5:00 am. At the end of the day, person one’s goal of solving the problem will have been done for longer than person’s two. Thus, person one is more intelligent.

12.1.9.- Isn’t thinking like an engineer biased towards modern eras where we have the luxury of not needing to memorize that much information anymore? Aren’t there better ways of thinking, at least for past eras?

It can seem natural to think that, due to the lack of proper technology, it wouldn’t have been possible in the past for everyone to apply this technique and then reach the best utopia they can get.

Thus you could have eventually concluded that this is not the best way of thinking, or at least not the only needed one.

You could have concluded that you needed intelligent engineers but also wise middle-man-memorizers to store information. And therefore, it would not be the best way of thinking, but one of the best needed.

I do not think this is the case. Because thinking like an engineer is just, at its core, the fixed variable resolution technique, which is what our brain biologically, chemically, does when processing reality.

So getting good at it, wether you worked as an information-storage man or an engineer. Being good at it will make you a more efficient human.

Information-storage people would have to be masters at it too, it is just that their job would be to, on top of that, be good at memorizing.

The same way a baker, even if he just bakes bread, should master how to think like an engineer. Because it is a technique agnostic to era or technology, deeply rooted in our chemistry.

12.1.10.- Does it mean someone depressed is not intelligent because he is not successfully being happy?

Feels rough to say it this way, but indeed, at first glance it does look like depressed people’s issue is they are too ignorant. But it is not really how that sounds, it goes deeper than that, when you are depressed your chemical reward system changes. It is not that much a matter of ignorance but one of “chemical-weakness”.

It seems like it is a state where the chemical influence of your mood has greater impact than your thoughts’ influence, which indeed they are just more chemical reactions.

So being depressed might just be a habit. A state in which your body got into by receiving or executing frequently enough certain negatively perceived external or internal actions which lead to you getting into the habit of, setting as default and tendency, the chemical configuration of depression.

The reasons that caused your biology to reach that state of constant depression or depressive tendencies can be incredibly diverse and that starts to be psychologist job to analyze.

We are mostly made of habits, automated cyclical actions we perform. You can understand habits as a bunch of fixed variables that solve frequently appearing problems. Our brain is the main part of our body that coordinates our dance with reality so it is not that far fetched to understand the habits motion and creation as a natural programmed action our brain creates on itself so to move around a reality that repeats frequently enough.

If you think about it, it goes further than the mind, the whole body works that way, what we use we keep and what we don’t we get rid of it. Like muscles, if you do not train at all for long enough your muscles will be consumed. Scientist say this is a strategy for saving energy by removing parts of the body we do not use.

Same applies for neurons and the brain, the less effort you put it through the more it degenerates.

However this natural behavior has a risk, not using something does not necessarily mean not needing it. You can have extra keys to your home yet you always use the same key, this does not mean one day you can lose or break the keys you use.

The understanding of depression as a habit proposes a deeper question. Is ignorance something we chose, or something our biology determines yet that can be molded? We are made of habits, our body works that way, what we use we keep and what we don’t we get rid of it.

Ignorance is just a manifestation of the weakness of the mind. In the same way can you train weakness by physical training you can train ignorance by the engineer’s way of thinking.

If your body got used to depressive actions he might as well just act as if that was the thing we are using now, keeping it.

The physical counterpart of this question would be, are fat people ignorant? Are fat people not intelligent? There are fat people who know the benefits of exercise yet they don’t. The same way, depressed people might have knowledge of stuff to do that would cheer them up, that if done consistently, the same way as exercise, will make them not to be depressed by default.

But they do not do it, neither fat nor depressed people. Well some do, we have success stories, I was slightly fat, I was depressed, not anymore. I managed to get out of it thanks to gathering knowledge, but this seems incomplete. Getting a specific knowledge is a one time action, not a habit.

So what is really what makes people remain in theses states? It can’t not be just ignorance, in cases where they do know the answers some people just do not improve.

In my case the thing that kept me depressed was my context, I was enslaved to a tinny repetitive village. I left and I improved naturally. Might it be the context the thing that keeps people depressed?

Was I not intelligent enough back then? I mean to some extent I really was not. If I attain to the definition of intelligence used:

Intelligence is the ability to handle patterns in such a way that uses work to reach some goal along time. The longer the time it is reached for, the more intelligence is needed.

When depressed we are failing in the happiness goal. So whatever we are doing, it is not intelligent. The thing is that it does not fully depend on ourselves, it does, but not completely. In extreme cases we need an extra external push so to do the work, spend the energy, that would make us accomplish the goal. The same way some people only started training because a friend motivated them to do so.

So I must conclude: Indeed if you are depressed you are not intelligent enough. Fortunately, in not extreme cases, just by reducing ignorance, learning more and moving by yourself you can beat it. But in extreme cases, where it is so hard-wired in your chemistry due to habit creation, in those cases, reducing ignorance is just not enough. You are not lazy, just literally too weak, too dumb, biologically limited, to do it and you will need to find help from others so they can temporarily lend you some strength to re-train your body, to mold it into the habit of a non-depressive chemical configuration.

You can not handle the patterns to happiness, manage the variables, due to not being able to work, like when a physical injury. If someone squats 200kgs, gets a leg injured, would we say this leg now is weak? I mean it is. But not because it will always be or always has been, but because it is injured.

Depression is the same, but it is not as visible, the injury is this chemical system configuration that got into a bad state. Which can even lead to suicide in the worst cases. It makes sense that, every time you injure yourself, wether physically or “psychologically” (I would prefer the term chemically), then your survival is threatened. If you get depressed, the second greater goal of live, happiness, is threatened, and thus it might lead to death.

And like with injuries, with small ones, you can even re-habilitate yourself. But if you break a bone and need surgery, you need others, a surgeon preferably. When you break your chemical reward configuration to one that tends to damage, like the depression one, you need others, a psychologist or psychiatrist preferably.

So yeah, you are not intelligent, but it is not really that rough of a statement. You are not intelligent but not because you will never be or you never have been, but because you are injured.

I think we are wrong in modern times to treat intelligence as a thing agnostic to physical and chemical representations, agnostic to matter but just in the “mind, the realm of thought and soul”.

So yeah, you are not intelligent if you are depressed, for exactly the same reasons you are not strong if you are injured.

We must get rid of our biases on the true nature of intelligence and dare to correctly say a truth that nowadays sounds harsh.

But it is not harsh at all, it is just a misunderstanding of our nature, a misunderstanding on how we think of intelligence.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

X.- Conclusion: Chapter 12 and Part 3.

As it has been highlighted over this part 3, this has been added to ground Cheerfulism even more on real experiences and to highlight and showcase even more how it is natural and comes and adapts with nature. Preaching what it is and being what it preaches.

Furthermore this part has been created for those who sought more details in certain aspects, like why didn’t you use this other definition? Why this wording? This so too in order to consolidate and further demonstrate the cognitive and philosophical effort put into this book. Showcasing even further that it is not just about the conclusions I reached, but about all the questions and alternatives I wondered about before reaching the conclusions. All the variable I fixed and varied.

Again, thinking like an engineer. Exploring, fixing, letting variable again, and so on.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transition from Part 3 to Part 4.

Alright now that everything has been explained I can relax and conclude this book.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

